8
Journal of Sensors
N →Network Size
SN →Sensor Node
MN →Malicious Node
CH →Cluster Head
BS →Base Station
CM →Cluster Member
NC →Cluster Heads list
x →Integer value between 0 and 𝑁−1
∀SN𝑖, 0 < 𝑖≤𝑁, compute 𝑇(SN𝑖) and random 𝑟SN𝑖
IF (𝑟SN𝑖< 𝑇(SN𝑖)) THEN
SN𝑖= CH
ELSE
SN𝑖= CM
ENDIF
∀CH𝑗, 𝑗∈NC
{
CH𝑗broadcasts the advertisement message (ADV CH)
x CMs will join CH𝑗
CH𝑗creates TDMA schedule
x CMs send data to CH𝑗in the corresponding TDMA time slot
}
IF CH = MN THEN
Performs the attack by dropping some packets (randomly or selectively)
ELSE
Sends aggregated data to BS
ENDIF
Algorithm 2: Model of Grayhole attack.
this will consume sensors’ energy and waste more time to
determine which CH to join. Moreover, the attacker attempts
to cheat victims to choose it as a CH, especially those nodes
that are located on a far distance from it in order to consume
their energy [40, 43]. Algorithm 3 shows the algorithm of
Flooding attack.
Flooding attack has been implemented in several ways
in the simulation environment. In some experiments 10
ADV CH messages were sent by the attacker; other scenarios
consider 50 ADV CH messages to be sent or a random
number between 10 and 50. The idea is when more ADV CH
messages are sent, more messages will be received and
more energy will be consumed. We have already studied in
[44] the impact of Flooding attack on WSN lifetime. The
energy consumption was shown in each round using several
attackers’ ratios.
5.4. Scheduling Attack. Scheduling attack was introduced in a
previous study of the authors [44]. Scheduling attack occurs
during the setup phase of LEACH protocol, when CHs set
up TDMA schedules for the data transmission time slots. The
attacker which acts as a CH will assign all nodes the same time
slot to send data. This is done by changing the behavior from
broadcast to unicast TDMA schedule. Such change will cause
packets collision which leads to data loss. Algorithm 4 shows
the algorithm of Scheduling attack.
The implementation of Scheduling attack is performed
by setting the same time for all Cluster Members to send
their data packets. Other scenarios assign every two nodes
the same time or every five nodes the same time.
In [44] it has been shown that the risk of DoS attackers on
LEACH protocol services could be significant. The attackers
can influence the network in more than one way, through
wasting the nodes’ energy or dropping their data packets.
This badly affects the services provided by WSN. Therefore,
a methodology to detect such attacks and protect different
services provided by WSN is urgently required.
Section 6 illustrates the importance of studying normal
and anomaly (under attack) behaviors of WSN protocols
and presenting them through a specialized dataset (WSN-
DS). WSN-DS allows several intelligent and data mining
approaches to be applied for the aim of better detection
and classification of DoS attacks. As a result, sensor nodes
will be more experienced with the normal behaviors and
attackers’ signatures and will be able to make proper decisions
at the right time. In this research ANN is applied to test the
constructed dataset and measure its accuracy in detecting and
classifying four types of DoS attacks.
6. Experiments and Results
In this paper, WSN-DS, a specialized dataset for WSN to
detect DoS attacks, was constructed. LEACH protocol was
used to collect the dataset because it is one of the most
common and widely used routing protocols in WSNs. WSN-
DS contains 374661 records that represent four types of
DoS attacks: Blackhole, Grayhole, Flooding, and Schedul-
ing attack, in addition to the normal behavior (no-attack)
records. Table 4 shows sample from WSN-DS dataset to help
in detecting and classifying DoS attacks.
 9161, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2016/4731953 by ABV Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior, Wiley Online Library on [06/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
