Journal of Sensors
7
N →Network Size
SN →Sensor Node
MN →Malicious Node
CH →Cluster Head
BS →Base Station
CM →Cluster Member
NC →Cluster Heads list
x →Integer value between 0 and 𝑁−1
∀SN𝑖, 0 < 𝑖≤𝑁, compute 𝑇(SN𝑖) and random 𝑟SN𝑖
IF (𝑟SN𝑖< 𝑇(SN𝑖)) THEN
SN𝑖= CH
ELSE
SN𝑖= CM
ENDIF
∀CH𝑗, 𝑗∈NC
{
CH𝑗broadcasts the advertisement message (ADV CH)
x CMs will join CH𝑗
CH𝑗creates TDMA schedule
x CMs send data to CH𝑗in the corresponding TDMA time slot
}
IF CH𝑗= MN THEN
Performs the attack by dropping all packets
ELSE
Sends aggregated data to BS
ENDIF
Algorithm 1: Model of Blackhole attack.
Data sent: the number of data packets sent from a
sensor to its CH.
Data received: the number of data packets received
from CH.
Data sent to BS: the number of data packets sent to
the BS.
Distance CH to BS: the distance between the CH and
the BS.
Send Code: the cluster sending code.
Attack Type: type of the node. It is a class of five pos-
sible values, namely, Blackhole, Grayhole, Flooding,
and Scheduling, in addition to normal, if the node is
not an attacker.
5. Attack Models
Four types of DoS attacks in LEACH protocol are imple-
mented in the constructed dataset; Blackhole, Grayhole,
Flooding, and Scheduling attacks. This section models each
one of these attacks. To ensure proper distribution of the
attacker nodes, the network terrain has been divided into 10
regions. Then the attackers’ ratios according to the simulation
scenario were distributed randomly within these regions.
5.1. Blackhole Attack. Blackhole attack is a type of DoS attack
where the attacker affects LEACH protocol by advertising
itself as a CH at the beginning of the round. Thus, any node
that has joined this CH during this round will send the data
packets to it in order to be forwarded to the BS. The Blackhole
attacker assumes the role of CH and it will keep dropping
these data packets and not forwarding them to the BS [39–
41]. Algorithm 1 shows the algorithm of Blackhole attack.
To implement this attack in the simulation environment,
several attackers’ intensities (10%, 30%, and 50%) have been
injected randomly to perform Blackhole attack. These attack-
ers which act as CHs will drop all the packets relayed through
them in their way to the BS.
5.2. Grayhole Attack. Grayhole attack is a type of DoS attack
where the attacker affects LEACH protocol by advertising
itself as a CH for other nodes. Therefore, when the forged CH
receives data packets from other nodes, it drops some packets
(randomly or selectively) and prevents them from reaching
the BS [40–42]. Algorithm 2 shows the algorithm of Grayhole
attack.
Similar to Blackhole attack, 10%, 30%, and 50% of
the sensor nodes are injected randomly to implement the
Grayhole attack. The decision whether to forward a specific
packet or not is also devised randomly. But the decision can
be done selectively based on the sensitivity of the sensed data
carried by the packet.
5.3. Flooding Attack. Flooding attack is a type of DoS attack
where the attacker affects LEACH protocol in more than
one way. This research studies the impact of Flooding
attack by sending large number of advertising CH massages
(ADV CH) with high transmission power. Consequently,
when sensors receive large number of ADV CH messages,
 9161, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2016/4731953 by ABV Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior, Wiley Online Library on [06/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
