2
Journal of Sensors
and its main objective is to interrupt or suspend the services
provided by WSNs [6, 7].
Because the process of avoiding or preventing security
threats cannot be always successful, an Intrusion Detection
System (IDS) is needed to detect known and unknown attacks
and alert sensor nodes about them [3, 4]. IDS allows detecting
suspicious or abnormal activities and triggers an alarm when
an intrusion occurs. The implementation of IDSs for WSNs
are more difficult than other systems because sensor nodes
are usually designed to be tiny and cheap, and they do not
have enough hardware resources. Additionally, there is no
specialized dataset that contains normal profiles and attacks
in WSN that can be used to detect an attacker signature
[3]. Considering the above challenges, there are mainly two
conditions while designing IDS for WSNs: The IDS must be of
high degree of accuracy in detecting an intruder that includes
unknown attacks, and it also must be lightweight to ensure
minimum overhead on the infrastructure of WSNs [8].
In this paper a specialized WSN dataset is constructed
to characterize four types of DoS attacks in addition to the
normal behavior when no attacks exist. WSNs’ characteristics
and challenges were considered when Low Energy Aware
Cluster Hierarchy (LEACH) [9] routing protocol was used
in this study. This choice was made since LEACH is one
of the most popular hierarchical routing protocols in WSNs
that consumes limited energy and is characterized by its
simplicity. The constructed dataset is called WSN-DS.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides an overview of LEACH protocol, IDSs, and reviews
related work. Section 3 analyzes LEACH protocol math-
ematically; Section 4 describes the extracted features of
the constructed dataset. Section 5 models different attacks.
Section 6 presents the experimental results obtained from
IDS and discusses the importance of the achieved results.
Conclusions and avenues for future work are presented in
Section 7.
2. Background and Related Works
This section presents an overview of LEACH protocol,
LEACH-based protocols, DoS, and IDS in WSNs.
2.1. LEACH Protocol Overview. LEACH is a hierarchical
routing protocol used in WSNs to increase the network’s
lifetime [9–11]. LEACH is a clustering, adaptive, and self-
organizing protocol. LEACH assumes that BS is fixed and
located far from sensor nodes. Additionally, all sensor nodes
are homogeneous and have limited energy and memory.
Sensors can communicate among each other and they can
communicate directly with the BS. The main idea of LEACH
protocol is to organize nodes into clusters to distribute the
energy among all nodes in the network. Also, in each cluster
there is a node called Cluster Head (CH) which aggregates
the data received from sensors within its cluster and forward
them to the BS. Figure 1 shows the structure of nodes in
LEACH routing protocol. Each round in LEACH protocol
consists mainly of two phases: setup phase and steady-state
phase. In the setup phase, clusters are formed, whereas in the
Cluster head 
Member node
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Sink
Figure 1: Nodes structure in LEACH routing protocol.
steady-state phase, sensed data will be transferred to the sink
node [12].
At the beginning of the setup phase, every node generates
a random number between 0 and 1, and it then computes
a threshold formula 𝑇(𝑛), as shown in (1). If the selected
random number is less than the threshold value, the node
becomes a CH:
𝑇(𝑛) =
{
{
{
0
1 −𝑝× (𝑟mod 𝑝−1),
∀𝑛∈𝑁
0,
otherwise,
(1)
where 𝑝is the CH probability (usually in LEACH a node
becomes CH with a probability of 0.05), 𝑁: is the set of nodes
that have not been a CH, in the last 1/𝑝rounds, and 𝑟is the
current round.
CH in the first round cannot be CH again in the next
1/𝑝rounds. After 1/𝑝−1 rounds, the threshold value
becomes 1 for any sensor node that has not been CH
yet, and after 1/𝑝rounds, all nodes are eligible again to
become CHs. Once CHs are assigned for all clusters, each
CH will broadcast an advertisement message (ADV CH) to
the rest of nodes using Carrier Sense Multiple Access-Media
Access Control (CSMA-MAC) protocol [9]. After receiving
ADV CH message, each node decides to which cluster it
belongs by selecting a CH based on the Received Signal
Strength Indication (RSSI) of the advertisement message, the
node then sends a (JOIN REQ) message to the selected CH
with the highest RSSI. Each node uses CSMA-MAC protocol
to transmit its selection [9, 10]. During the setup phase,
all CHs keep their receivers ON. After clusters formation,
each CH creates a Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA)
schedule according to the number of nodes in its cluster called
Cluster Members (CM) and broadcasts it to them.
During steady-state phase, each sensor node collects data
and transmits them to its CH during its allocated time slot
according to the TDMA schedule. CHs receive all the data
and aggregate them before sending them to the BS. After
a predetermined time, the network starts another round by
going back to the setup and steady-state phases again [9].
2.2. LEACH-Based Protocols. LEACH was and still is studied
in enormous number of research articles. The authors in [13]
 9161, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2016/4731953 by ABV Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior, Wiley Online Library on [06/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
