Journal of Sensors
3
provided a review of 27 clustering and routing techniques
based on LEACH protocol for WSNs that includes a com-
prehensive discussion and comparisons among them. The
authors in [14, 15] highlighted LEACH protocol and presented
fifteen LEACH improved versions introduced in the liter-
ature. The papers have compared some features of several
variants of LEACH protocol not empirically but based on
their descriptions. In [16] the author proposed and evaluated
two new clustering-based protocols for heterogeneous WSNs
that were built based on LEACH protocol by considering
three types of nodes with different battery energies, which
was the source of heterogeneity in the author’s protocols.
LEACH-ICE (LEACH Inner Cluster Election) algorithm
based on LEACH algorithm was introduced in [17]. The
threshold function of the node selected as CH is adjusted.
Also, direct communication with the BS occurs when a node
is closer to the BS. To improve the clustering mechanism,
LEACH-ICE elects a new CH inside the cluster when the
resident energy of the current CH is lower than a predefined
threshold.
In [18] the authors proposed an energy efficient secondary
CH selection algorithm for WSN. By controlling the distances
among the CHs, a uniform distribution of CHs is satisfied.
Two-level hierarchy mode was applied to transmit data to the
BS. LEACH is compared with the improved LEACH-TLCH
method. Simulation results show that the improved method
can reduce the network consumption of energy and lengthen
the network’s lifetime.
In [19], a distributive Energy Neutral Clustering (ENC)
protocol was proposed to group the network into several
clusters, with the goal of providing perpetual network oper-
ation. ENC employs a novel Cluster Head Group (CHG)
mechanism that allows a cluster to use multiple CHs to share
heavy traffic load and to reduce the frequency of cluster
reformation. An extension to ENC based on convex opti-
mization techniques of the number of clusters was proposed
to group the network into equal-sized clusters to maximize
network information gathering. According to the authors’
experiments, the proposed protocol can successfully prevent
sensors from shutting down due to excessive usage of energy.
2.3. DoS and IDS in WSN. As mentioned earlier, DoS is a
common attack that could have a severe impact on WSN’s
functionalities and services [20]. Many different types of DoS
attacks have been identified so far, for example, Blackhole
attack, Grayhole attack, Flooding attack, and Wormhole. The
seriousness of DoS attack stems from the fact that most WSN
applications require the deployment of a sensor node in harsh
environments where they are far away and difficult to be
controlled [20, 21]. Recently, many researches are going on
in an attempt to find solutions for DoS attacks, but mainly
they have tackled one or two forms of these attacks but not
the majority [2, 22–24]. Moreover, they offer partial solutions
and they cannot be applied concurrently because they will
consume high energy, which is not practical in WSNs [2, 25].
Therefore, a mechanism should be found to identify different
behaviors of DoS attacks and classify them to take effective
countermeasures.
Cryptography is a security mechanism that is used for
protecting WSN against external attacks. It ensures many
security services including integrity and authentication by
checking the data packet source and its contents using
several techniques such as symmetric encryption, public key
cryptography, and hash functions [25]. These techniques
cannot be used to detect internal attacks when security keys
are exposed to the attacker which uses them to perform
encryption and decryption of messages’ contents. Conse-
quently, such techniques serve as first line of defense [5].
Attackers always attempt to launch new and unknown attacks
in more than one way; therefore, it is necessary to create an
efficient IDS, which acts as a second line of defense to detect
known and unknown attacks and alert sensor nodes about
them. IDS allows detecting suspicious or abnormal activities
and triggers alarms when intrusions are detected [26].
The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) [27] categorized intrusion detection into two main
approaches: anomaly detection and misuse detection. In
anomaly detection the system depends on prior knowledge of
normal behavior of the network which will be then compared
with its current activities. In misuse detection, the system
depends on prior knowledge of attack signatures. It compares
the signature with the current activities in the network.
IDS has become an important security component of
WSNs; however, the implementation of IDS in WSNs intro-
duces number of challenges that can have negative impact
on WSN performance [28]. It is inefficient to use IDS in
every sensor node due to the resource-constrained nature of
such nodes. IDS components should be installed in places
where sensor nodes can be followed to be able to defend
against certain threats to the network. IDS is also used in
WSNs where huge amount of traffic is transmitted; therefore,
there is a possibility an intrusion could be missed as sensor
nodes generally have restrictions in handling huge data in the
network.
There are two main components of IDS, features extrac-
tion and modeling algorithm. Features extraction defines
measured attributes that are linked to the IDS functionalities.
Modeling algorithm is the main component; the accuracy
and the efficiency of detecting and responding to intrusions
depend on the modeling algorithm. IDS may have compo-
nents that depend on the network characteristics and possible
intrusions [29]. Most of IDSs have six common components
as shown in Figure 2:
(1) Monitoring component: which is used for local activ-
ity monitoring or for monitoring neighbor sensor
nodes. This component mostly monitors internal
activities, traffic patterns, and resource utilization.
(2) Analysis component: which contains all records of
normal and abnormal behaviors for all nodes in the
network [30].
(3) Detection component: which is the main component
that is built based on the modeling algorithm. It
works after analyzing network behaviors. Decisions
are made to declare such behaviors as malicious or not
[31].
 9161, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2016/4731953 by ABV Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior, Wiley Online Library on [06/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
