4
Journal of Sensors
Monitoring
Analysis
Detection
Logging
Alarming
Prevention
Figure 2: IDS components.
The other three components of IDS consist of actions that
can be taken, either one, two, or all of them [32]:
(4) Logging: storing each packet in a log file so that secu-
rity administrator can use it for later analysis.
(5) Alarming: a responding generating component in
case of detection of an intrusion. The response
may trigger an alarm to announce the misbehaving
node(s).
(6) Prevention: an advanced step that can be added to IDS
to enable it to take an action to prevent dealing with an
attack once detected. This can be done, for example,
by excluding harmful nodes from the network [30].
Designing a specialized dataset for WSN to achieve better
detection and classification of DoS attacks is the main aim of
this paper. The authors in [30] presented current IDSs and a
comparison among them. The authors revised mechanisms,
attacks, and evaluation metrics but without mentioning the
use of specialized datasets. The comparison depended on the
type of IDSs, whether it is anomaly-based, signature-based,
hybrid, or cross layer.
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Tools Competi-
tion (KDD) dataset [33] was constructed for Local Area Net-
work (LAN). KDD is not specialized for wireless in general
and WSN in particular, even though many researchers have
used it to deal with fraud and intrusion detection [34].
Anomaly, signature, and hybrid-based IDSs have been
reviewed in [35]. Mainly KDDCup-99 was used in these IDSs.
For example, in the eight studied hybrid-based IDSs, four of
them have used KDDCup-99 and the rest have used real data
samples.
Other researches which also considered KDD in their
analysis and classifications can be found in [36–38].
It can be concluded that there is no specialized dataset
for WSN that has been reported in the literature for detecting
and classifying as many DoS as possible. Therefore, there is
an urgent need to define a labelled, specialized dataset that
successfully characterizes WSN to help in studying normal
and anomaly behaviors. The construction and testing of such
dataset are proposed in this paper.
3. LEACH Mathematical Analysis
To ensure the correctness of the constructed dataset called
WSN-DS, a mathematical analysis has been conducted to all
LEACH phases and then has been compared to the results of
simulation in case of normal situation when there is no DoS
attack. The terms used in LEACH’s mathematical model are
listed as follows:
LEACH Mathematical Model Terms
𝑁: number of sensor nodes in WSN
S𝑖: senor node 𝑖
NC: number of CHs
CM: number of members within a cluster
ADV-CH-SENT: number of advertisement messages
sent by CH
ADV-CH-RCVD: number of advertisement messages
received by sensor nodes
JOIN-REQ-SENT: number of join request messages
sent by sensor nodes
JOIN-REQ-RCVD: number of join request messages
received by CHs
TDMA-SENT: number of TDMA schedules sent by
CHs
TDMA-RCVD: number of TDMA schedules received
by sensor nodes
NO-DATA-PKT: number of data packets received by
a CH
3.1. Advertisement Phase. Theorem 1 calculates the number
of advertisement messages that are sent by CHs and received
by CMs in a specific round as follows.
Theorem 1. In the advertisement phase of LEACH, maximum
ADV-CH-SENT in a specific round is 𝑁𝐶and the maximum
ADV-CH-RCVD is (𝑁−1) ∗𝑁𝐶.
 9161, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2016/4731953 by ABV Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior, Wiley Online Library on [06/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
