Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
1 has been reported in other applications (Provost & Fawcett, 2001).
There have been
attempts to deal with imbalanced datasets in domains such as fraudulent telephone calls
(Fawcett & Provost, 1996), telecommunications management (Ezawa, Singh, & Norton,
1996), text classiﬁcation (Lewis & Catlett, 1994; Dumais, Platt, Heckerman, & Sahami,
1998; Mladeni´c & Grobelnik, 1999; Lewis & Ringuette, 1994; Cohen, 1995a) and detection
of oil spills in satellite images (Kubat, Holte, & Matwin, 1998).
The performance of machine learning algorithms is typically evaluated using predictive
accuracy. However, this is not appropriate when the data is imbalanced and/or the costs of
diﬀerent errors vary markedly. As an example, consider the classiﬁcation of pixels in mam-
mogram images as possibly cancerous (Woods, Doss, Bowyer, Solka, Priebe, & Kegelmeyer,
1993). A typical mammography dataset might contain 98% normal pixels and 2% abnormal
pixels. A simple default strategy of guessing the majority class would give a predictive ac-
curacy of 98%. However, the nature of the application requires a fairly high rate of correct
detection in the minority class and allows for a small error rate in the majority class in
order to achieve this. Simple predictive accuracy is clearly not appropriate in such situ-
ations. The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a standard technique for
summarizing classiﬁer performance over a range of tradeoﬀs between true positive and false
positive error rates (Swets, 1988). The Area Under the Curve (AUC) is an accepted tradi-
tional performance metric for a ROC curve (Duda, Hart, & Stork, 2001; Bradley, 1997; Lee,
2000). The ROC convex hull can also be used as a robust method of identifying potentially
optimal classiﬁers (Provost & Fawcett, 2001). If a line passes through a point on the convex
hull, then there is no other line with the same slope passing through another point with a
larger true positive (TP) intercept. Thus, the classiﬁer at that point is optimal under any
distribution assumptions in tandem with that slope.
The machine learning community has addressed the issue of class imbalance in two ways.
One is to assign distinct costs to training examples (Pazzani, Merz, Murphy, Ali, Hume, &
Brunk, 1994; Domingos, 1999). The other is to re-sample the original dataset, either by over-
sampling the minority class and/or under-sampling the majority class (Kubat & Matwin,
1997; Japkowicz, 2000; Lewis & Catlett, 1994; Ling & Li, 1998). Our approach (Chawla,
Bowyer, Hall, & Kegelmeyer, 2000) blends under-sampling of the majority class with a
special form of over-sampling the minority class. Experiments with various datasets and
the C4.5 decision tree classiﬁer (Quinlan, 1992), Ripper (Cohen, 1995b), and a Naive Bayes
Classiﬁer show that our approach improves over other previous re-sampling, modifying loss
ratio, and class priors approaches, using either the AUC or ROC convex hull.
Section 2 gives an overview of performance measures.
Section 3 reviews the most
closely related work dealing with imbalanced datasets. Section 4 presents the details of
our approach. Section 5 presents experimental results comparing our approach to other
re-sampling approaches. Section 6 discusses the results and suggests directions for future
work.
2. Performance Measures
The performance of machine learning algorithms is typically evaluated by a confusion matrix
as illustrated in Figure 1 (for a 2 class problem). The columns are the Predicted class and the
rows are the Actual class. In the confusion matrix, TN is the number of negative examples
322
