SMOTE
marketing analysis problem (Ling & Li, 1998). In one experiment, they under-sampled the
majority class and noted that the best lift index is obtained when the classes are equally
represented (Ling & Li, 1998).
In another experiment, they over-sampled the positive
(minority) examples with replacement to match the number of negative (majority) examples
to the number of positive examples. The over-sampling and under-sampling combination
did not provide signiﬁcant improvement in the lift index. However, our approach to over-
sampling diﬀers from theirs.
Solberg and Solberg (1996) considered the problem of imbalanced data sets in oil slick
classiﬁcation from SAR imagery. They used over-sampling and under-sampling techniques
to improve the classiﬁcation of oil slicks. Their training data had a distribution of 42 oil
slicks and 2,471 look-alikes, giving a prior probability of 0.98 for look-alikes. This imbalance
would lead the learner (without any appropriate loss functions or a methodology to modify
priors) to classify almost all look-alikes correctly at the expense of misclassifying many of
the oil slick samples (Solberg & Solberg, 1996). To overcome this imbalance problem, they
over-sampled (with replacement) 100 samples from the oil slick, and they randomly sampled
100 samples from the non oil slick class to create a new dataset with equal probabilities.
They learned a classiﬁer tree on this balanced data set and achieved a 14% error rate on the
oil slicks in a leave-one-out method for error estimation; on the look alikes they achieved
an error rate of 4% (Solberg & Solberg, 1996).
Another approach that is similar to our work is that of Domingos (1999). He compares
the “metacost” approach to each of majority under-sampling and minority over-sampling.
He ﬁnds that metacost improves over either, and that under-sampling is preferable to mi-
nority over-sampling. Error-based classiﬁers are made cost-sensitive. The probability of
each class for each example is estimated, and the examples are relabeled optimally with
respect to the misclassiﬁcation costs. The relabeling of the examples expands the decision
space as it creates new samples from which the classiﬁer may learn (Domingos, 1999).
A feed-forward neural network trained on an imbalanced dataset may not learn to dis-
criminate enough between classes (DeRouin, Brown, Fausett, & Schneider, 1991).
The
authors proposed that the learning rate of the neural network be adapted to the statistics
of class representation in the data. They calculated an attention factor from the proportion
of samples presented to the neural network for training. The learning rate of the network
elements was adjusted based on the attention factor. They experimented on an artiﬁcially
generated training set and on a real-world training set, both with multiple (more than two)
classes. They compared this to the approach of replicating the minority class samples to
balance the data set used for training. The classiﬁcation accuracy on the minority class was
improved.
Lewis and Catlett (1994) examined heterogeneous uncertainty sampling for supervised
learning. This method is useful for training samples with uncertain classes. The training
samples are labeled incrementally in two phases and the uncertain instances are passed on
to the next phase. They modiﬁed C4.5 to include a loss ratio for determining the class
values at the leaves. The class values were determined by comparison with a probability
threshold of LR/(LR + 1), where LR is the loss ratio (Lewis & Catlett, 1994).
The information retrieval (IR) domain (Dumais et al., 1998; Mladeni´c & Grobelnik,
1999; Lewis & Ringuette, 1994; Cohen, 1995a) also faces the problem of class imbalance
in the dataset. A document or web page is converted into a bag-of-words representation;
325
