SMOTE
between corresponding feature values for all feature vectors is created.
The distance δ
between two corresponding feature values is deﬁned as follows.
δ(V1, V2) =
n

i=1
|C1i
C1
−C2i
C2
|
k
(1)
In the above equation, V1 and V2 are the two corresponding feature values. C1 is the total
number of occurrences of feature value V1, and C1i is the number of occurrences of feature
value V1 for class i. A similar convention can also be applied to C2i and C2. k is a constant,
usually set to 1. This equation is used to compute the matrix of value diﬀerences for each
nominal feature in the given set of feature vectors. Equation 1 gives a geometric distance
on a ﬁxed, ﬁnite set of values (Cost & Salzberg, 1993). Cost and Salzberg’s modiﬁed VDM
omits the weight term wa
f included in the δ computation by Stanﬁll and Waltz, which has
an eﬀect of making δ symmetric. The distance ∆between two feature vectors is given by:
∆(X, Y ) = wxwy
N

i=1
δ(xi, yi)r
(2)
r = 1 yields the Manhattan distance, and r = 2 yields the Euclidean distance (Cost &
Salzberg, 1993). wx and wy are the exemplar weights in the modiﬁed VDM. wy = 1 for a
new example (feature vector), and wx is the bias towards more reliable examples (feature
vectors) and is computed as the ratio of the number of uses of a feature vector to the number
of correct uses of the feature vector; thus, more accurate feature vectors will have wx ≈
1. For SMOTE-N we can ignore these weights in equation 2, as SMOTE-N is not used for
classiﬁcation purposes directly. However, we can redeﬁne these weights to give more weight
to the minority class feature vectors falling closer to the majority class feature vectors; thus,
making those minority class features appear further away from the feature vector under
consideration. Since, we are more interested in forming broader but accurate regions of the
minority class, the weights might be used to avoid populating along neighbors which fall
closer to the majority class. To generate new minority class feature vectors, we can create
new set feature values by taking the majority vote of the feature vector in consideration and
its k nearest neighbors. Table 6.2 shows an example of creating a synthetic feature vector.
Let F1 = A B C D E be the feature vector under consideration
and let its 2 nearest neighbors be
F2 = A F C G N
F3 = H B C D N
The application of SMOTE-N would create the following fea-
ture vector:
FS = A B C D N
Table 7: Example of SMOTE-N
351
