Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
C4.5
Ripper
Naive Bayes
SMOTE 
and Undersampling.
Loss-Ratio
varied from 0.9 to 0.001.
 Modify costs of majority and minority 
classes by changing priors.
ROC’s generated for SMOTE, Undersampling
and Loss Ratio comparisons. Performance 
evaluated with AUC and ROC convex hull.
ROC’s generated for comparison between 
SMOTE and Under-sampling using C4.5, and
SMOTE using C4.5 and Naive bayes. 
Performance evaluated with AUC and ROC convex hull.
Figure 6: Experiments Overview
2. Ripper: We compared various combinations of SMOTE and under-sampling with
plain under-sampling using Ripper (Cohen, 1995b) as the base classiﬁer.
We also
varied Ripper’s loss ratio (Cohen & Singer, 1996; Lewis & Catlett, 1994) from 0.9 to
0.001 (as a means of varying misclassiﬁcation cost) and compared the eﬀect of this
variation with the combination of SMOTE and under-sampling. By reducing the loss
ratio from 0.9 to 0.001 we were able to build a set of rules for the minority class.
3. Naive Bayes Classiﬁer: The Naive Bayes Classiﬁer2 can be made cost-sensitive
by varying the priors of the minority class.
We varied the priors of the minority
class from 1 to 50 times the majority class and compared with C4.5’s SMOTE and
under-sampling combination.
These diﬀerent learning algorithms allowed SMOTE to be compared to some methods
that can handle misclassiﬁcation costs directly. %FP and %TP were averaged over 10-fold
cross-validation runs for each of the data combinations. The minority class examples were
over-sampled by calculating the ﬁve nearest neighbors and generating synthetic examples.
The AUC was calculated using the trapezoidal rule. We extrapolated an extra point of TP
= 100% and FP = 100% for each ROC curve. We also computed the ROC convex hull
to identify the optimal classiﬁers, as the points lying on the hull are potentially optimal
classiﬁers (Provost & Fawcett, 2001).
2. The source code was downloaded from http://fuzzy.cs.uni-magdeburg.de/˜borgelt/software.html.
332
