Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Percent
True
Positive
Percent  False  Positive
0
100
100
original  data  set
increased undersampling
of  the  majority class moves
the operating point to the
upper right
ROC
(100, 100)
y = x
Ideal point
Figure 2: Illustration of sweeping out a ROC curve through under-sampling.
Increased
under-sampling of the majority (negative) class will move the performance from
the lower left point to the upper right.
related work proposed the SHRINK system that classiﬁes an overlapping region of minor-
ity (positive) and majority (negative) classes as positive; it searches for the “best positive
region” (Kubat et al., 1998).
Japkowicz (2000) discussed the eﬀect of imbalance in a dataset. She evaluated three
strategies: under-sampling, resampling and a recognition-based induction scheme. We focus
on her sampling approaches.
She experimented on artiﬁcial 1D data in order to easily
measure and construct concept complexity.
Two resampling methods were considered.
Random resampling consisted of resampling the smaller class at random until it consisted
of as many samples as the majority class and “focused resampling” consisted of resampling
only those minority examples that occurred on the boundary between the minority and
majority classes. Random under-sampling was considered, which involved under-sampling
the majority class samples at random until their numbers matched the number of minority
class samples; focused under-sampling involved under-sampling the majority class samples
lying further away. She noted that both the sampling approaches were eﬀective, and she also
observed that using the sophisticated sampling techniques did not give any clear advantage
in the domain considered (Japkowicz, 2000).
One approach that is particularly relevant to our work is that of Ling and Li (1998).
They combined over-sampling of the minority class with under-sampling of the majority
class. They used lift analysis instead of accuracy to measure a classiﬁer’s performance. They
proposed that the test examples be ranked by a conﬁdence measure and then lift be used as
the evaluation criteria. A lift curve is similar to an ROC curve, but is more tailored for the
324
