Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
The data for the plot in Figure 3 was extracted from a Mammography dataset1 (Woods
et al., 1993). The minority class samples are shown by + and the majority class samples
are shown by o in the plot. In Figure 3(a), the region indicated by the solid-line rectangle
is a majority class decision region. Nevertheless, it contains three minority class samples
shown by ’+’ as false negatives. If we replicate the minority class, the decision region for the
minority class becomes very speciﬁc and will cause new splits in the decision tree. This will
lead to more terminal nodes (leaves) as the learning algorithm tries to learn more and more
speciﬁc regions of the minority class; in essence, overﬁtting. Replication of the minority
class does not cause its decision boundary to spread into the majority class region. Thus,
in Figure 3(b), the three samples previously in the majority class decision region now have
very speciﬁc decision regions.
4.2 SMOTE
We propose an over-sampling approach in which the minority class is over-sampled by cre-
ating “synthetic” examples rather than by over-sampling with replacement. This approach
is inspired by a technique that proved successful in handwritten character recognition (Ha
& Bunke, 1997). They created extra training data by performing certain operations on
real data. In their case, operations like rotation and skew were natural ways to perturb
the training data. We generate synthetic examples in a less application-speciﬁc manner, by
operating in “feature space” rather than “data space”. The minority class is over-sampled
by taking each minority class sample and introducing synthetic examples along the line
segments joining any/all of the k minority class nearest neighbors. Depending upon the
amount of over-sampling required, neighbors from the k nearest neighbors are randomly
chosen.
Our implementation currently uses ﬁve nearest neighbors.
For instance, if the
amount of over-sampling needed is 200%, only two neighbors from the ﬁve nearest neigh-
bors are chosen and one sample is generated in the direction of each. Synthetic samples
are generated in the following way: Take the diﬀerence between the feature vector (sample)
under consideration and its nearest neighbor. Multiply this diﬀerence by a random number
between 0 and 1, and add it to the feature vector under consideration. This causes the
selection of a random point along the line segment between two speciﬁc features.
This
approach eﬀectively forces the decision region of the minority class to become more general.
Algorithm SMOTE, on the next page, is the pseudo-code for SMOTE. Table 4.2 shows
an example of calculation of random synthetic samples.
The amount of over-sampling
is a parameter of the system, and a series of ROC curves can be generated for diﬀerent
populations and ROC analysis performed.
The synthetic examples cause the classiﬁer to create larger and less speciﬁc decision
regions as shown by the dashed lines in Figure 3(c), rather than smaller and more speciﬁc
regions. More general regions are now learned for the minority class samples rather than
those being subsumed by the majority class samples around them. The eﬀect is that de-
cision trees generalize better. Figures 4 and 5 compare the minority over-sampling with
replacement and SMOTE. The experiments were conducted on the mammography dataset.
There were 10923 examples in the majority class and 260 examples in the minority class
originally. We have approximately 9831 examples in the majority class and 233 examples
1. The data is available from the USF Intelligent Systems Lab, http://morden.csee.usf.edu/˜chawla.
328
