Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
6. Future Work
There are several topics to be considered further in this line of research. Automated adaptive
selection of the number of nearest neighbors would be valuable. Diﬀerent strategies for
creating the synthetic neighbors may be able to improve the performance. Also, selecting
nearest neighbors with a focus on examples that are incorrectly classiﬁed may improve
performance. A minority class sample could possibly have a majority class sample as its
nearest neighbor rather than a minority class sample. This crowding will likely contribute
to the redrawing of the decision surfaces in favor of the minority class.
In addition to
these topics, the following subsections discuss two possible extensions of SMOTE, and an
application of SMOTE to information retrieval.
6.1 SMOTE-NC
While our SMOTE approach currently does not handle data sets with all nominal features,
it was generalized to handle mixed datasets of continuous and nominal features. We call this
approach Synthetic Minority Over-sampling TEchnique-Nominal Continuous [SMOTE-NC].
We tested this approach on the Adult dataset from the UCI repository. The SMOTE-NC
algorithm is described below.
1. Median computation: Compute the median of standard deviations of all continuous
features for the minority class. If the nominal features diﬀer between a sample and
its potential nearest neighbors, then this median is included in the Euclidean distance
computation. We use median to penalize the diﬀerence of nominal features by an
amount that is related to the typical diﬀerence in continuous feature values.
2. Nearest neighbor computation: Compute the Euclidean distance between the feature
vector for which k-nearest neighbors are being identiﬁed (minority class sample) and
the other feature vectors (minority class samples) using the continuous feature space.
For every diﬀering nominal feature between the considered feature vector and its
potential nearest-neighbor, include the median of the standard deviations previously
computed, in the Euclidean distance computation. Table 2 demonstrates an example.
F1 = 1 2 3 A B C [Let this be the sample for which we are computing nearest
neighbors]
F2 = 4 6 5 A D E
F3 = 3 5 6 A B K
So, Euclidean Distance between F2 and F1 would be:
Eucl = sqrt[(4-1)2 + (6-2)2 + (5-3)2 + Med2 + Med2]
Med is the median of the standard deviations of continuous features of the mi-
nority class.
The median term is included twice for feature numbers 5: B→D and 6: C→E,
which diﬀer for the two feature vectors: F1 and F2.
Table 6: Example of nearest neighbor computation for SMOTE-NC.
348
