Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
6.3 Application of SMOTE to Information Retrieval
We are investigating the application of SMOTE to information retrieval (IR). The IR prob-
lems come with a plethora of features and potentially many categories. SMOTE would have
to be applied in conjunction with a feature selection algorithm, after transforming the given
document or web page in a bag-of-words format.
An interesting comparison to SMOTE would be the combination of Naive Bayes and
Odds ratio. Odds ratio focuses on a target class, and ranks documents according to their
relevance to the target or positive class. SMOTE also focuses on a target class by creating
more examples of that class.
7. Summary
The results show that the SMOTE approach can improve the accuracy of classiﬁers for
a minority class. SMOTE provides a new approach to over-sampling. The combination
of SMOTE and under-sampling performs better than plain under-sampling. SMOTE was
tested on a variety of datasets, with varying degrees of imbalance and varying amounts of
data in the training set, thus providing a diverse testbed. The combination of SMOTE and
under-sampling also performs better, based on domination in the ROC space, than varying
loss ratios in Ripper or by varying the class priors in Naive Bayes Classiﬁer: the methods
that could directly handle the skewed class distribution. SMOTE forces focused learning
and introduces a bias towards the minority class. Only for Pima — the least skewed dataset
— does the Naive Bayes Classiﬁer perform better than SMOTE-C4.5. Also, only for the Oil
dataset does the Under-Ripper perform better than SMOTE-Ripper. For the Can dataset,
SMOTE-classiﬁer and Under-classiﬁer ROC curves overlap in the ROC space. For all the
rest of the datasets SMOTE-classiﬁer performs better than Under-classiﬁer, Loss Ratio,
and Naive Bayes. Out of a total of 48 experiments performed, SMOTE-classiﬁer does not
perform the best only for 4 experiments.
The interpretation of why synthetic minority over-sampling improves performance where
as minority over-sampling with replacement does not is fairly straightforward. Consider
the eﬀect on the decision regions in feature space when minority over-sampling is done
by replication (sampling with replacement) versus the introduction of synthetic examples.
With replication, the decision region that results in a classiﬁcation decision for the minority
class can actually become smaller and more speciﬁc as the minority samples in the region are
replicated. This is the opposite of the desired eﬀect. Our method of synthetic over-sampling
works to cause the classiﬁer to build larger decision regions that contain nearby minority
class points. The same reasons may be applicable to why SMOTE performs better than
Ripper’s loss ratio and Naive Bayes; these methods, nonetheless, are still learning from
the information provided in the dataset, albeit with diﬀerent cost information. SMOTE
provides more related minority class samples to learn from, thus allowing a learner to carve
broader decision regions, leading to more coverage of the minority class.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the United States Department of Energy through
the Sandia National Laboratories ASCI VIEWS Data Discovery Program, contract number
352
