Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
that is, a feature vector reﬂecting occurrences of words in the page is constructed. Usually,
there are very few instances of the interesting category in text categorization. This over-
representation of the negative class in information retrieval problems can cause problems
in evaluating classiﬁers’ performances. Since error rate is not a good metric for skewed
datasets, the classiﬁcation performance of algorithms in information retrieval is usually
measured by precision and recall:
recall =
TP
TP + FN
precision =
TP
TP + FP
Mladeni´c and Grobelnik (1999) proposed a feature subset selection approach to deal
with imbalanced class distribution in the IR domain.
They experimented with various
feature selection methods, and found that the odds ratio (van Rijsbergen, Harper, & Porter,
1981) when combined with a Naive Bayes classiﬁer performs best in their domain. Odds
ratio is a probabilistic measure used to rank documents according to their relevance to the
positive class (minority class). Information gain for a word, on the other hand, does not
pay attention to a particular target class; it is computed per word for each class. In an
imbalanced text dataset (assuming 98 to 99% is the negative class), most of the features will
be associated with the negative class. Odds ratio incorporates the target class information in
its metric giving better results when compared to information gain for text categorization.
Provost and Fawcett (1997) introduced the ROC convex hull method to estimate the
classiﬁer performance for imbalanced datasets. They note that the problems of unequal
class distribution and unequal error costs are related and that little work has been done to
address either problem (Provost & Fawcett, 2001). In the ROC convex hull method, the
ROC space is used to separate classiﬁcation performance from the class and cost distribution
information.
To summarize the literature, under-sampling the majority class enables better classiﬁers
to be built than over-sampling the minority class. A combination of the two as done in
previous work does not lead to classiﬁers that outperform those built utilizing only under-
sampling. However, the over-sampling of the minority class has been done by sampling with
replacement from the original data. Our approach uses a diﬀerent method of over-sampling.
4. SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling TEchnique
4.1 Minority over-sampling with replacement
Previous research (Ling & Li, 1998; Japkowicz, 2000) has discussed over-sampling with
replacement and has noted that it doesn’t signiﬁcantly improve minority class recognition.
We interpret the underlying eﬀect in terms of decision regions in feature space. Essentially,
as the minority class is over-sampled by increasing amounts, the eﬀect is to identify similar
but more speciﬁc regions in the feature space as the decision region for the minority class.
This eﬀect for decision trees can be understood from the plots in Figure 3.
326
