SMOTE
Predicted
Negative
Predicted
Positive
TN
FP
FN
TP
Actual
Negative
Actual
Positive
Figure 1: Confusion Matrix
correctly classiﬁed (True Negatives), FP is the number of negative examples incorrectly
classiﬁed as positive (False Positives), FN is the number of positive examples incorrectly
classiﬁed as negative (False Negatives) and TP is the number of positive examples correctly
classiﬁed (True Positives).
Predictive accuracy is the performance measure generally associated with machine learn-
ing algorithms and is deﬁned as Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN). In the
context of balanced datasets and equal error costs, it is reasonable to use error rate as a
performance metric. Error rate is 1 −Accuracy. In the presence of imbalanced datasets
with unequal error costs, it is more appropriate to use the ROC curve or other similar
techniques (Ling & Li, 1998; Drummond & Holte, 2000; Provost & Fawcett, 2001; Bradley,
1997; Turney, 1996).
ROC curves can be thought of as representing the family of best decision boundaries for
relative costs of TP and FP. On an ROC curve the X-axis represents %FP = FP/(TN+FP)
and the Y-axis represents %TP = TP/(TP +FN). The ideal point on the ROC curve would
be (0,100), that is all positive examples are classiﬁed correctly and no negative examples are
misclassiﬁed as positive. One way an ROC curve can be swept out is by manipulating the
balance of training samples for each class in the training set. Figure 2 shows an illustration.
The line y = x represents the scenario of randomly guessing the class. Area Under the ROC
Curve (AUC) is a useful metric for classiﬁer performance as it is independent of the decision
criterion selected and prior probabilities. The AUC comparison can establish a dominance
relationship between classiﬁers. If the ROC curves are intersecting, the total AUC is an
average comparison between models (Lee, 2000). However, for some speciﬁc cost and class
distributions, the classiﬁer having maximum AUC may in fact be suboptimal. Hence, we
also compute the ROC convex hulls, since the points lying on the ROC convex hull are
potentially optimal (Provost, Fawcett, & Kohavi, 1998; Provost & Fawcett, 2001).
3. Previous Work: Imbalanced datasets
Kubat and Matwin (1997) selectively under-sampled the majority class while keeping the
original population of the minority class. They have used the geometric mean as a perfor-
mance measure for the classiﬁer, which can be related to a single point on the ROC curve.
The minority examples were divided into four categories: some noise overlapping the pos-
itive class decision region, borderline samples, redundant samples and safe samples. The
borderline examples were detected using the Tomek links concept (Tomek, 1976). Another
323
