

===== PAGE 1 =====

Academic Editor: Alessandra Rizzardi
Received: 2 December 2025
Revised: 23 December 2025
Accepted: 31 December 2025
Published: 6 January 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
From Edge Transformer to IoT Decisions: Offloaded Embeddings
for Lightweight Intrusion Detection
Frédéric Adjewa 1,2,*
, Moez Esseghir 1 and Leïla Merghem-Boulahia 1
1
LIST3N, University of Technology of Troyes, 12 rue Marie Curie, 10010 Troyes CEDEX, France;
moez.esseghir@utt.fr (M.E.); leila.merghem_boulahia@utt.fr (L.M.-B.)
2
Computer Science Departement, Saint Jean Ingénieur, Yaounde 749, Cameroon
*
Correspondence: frederic.adjewa@utt.fr
Abstract
The convergence of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and the Internet of Things (IoT) is enabling
a new class of intelligent applications. Specifically, Large Language Models (LLMs) are
emerging as powerful tools not only for natural language understanding but also for
enhancing IoT security. However, the integration of these computationally intensive models
into resource-constrained IoT environments presents significant challenges. This paper
provides an in-depth examination of how LLMs can be adapted to secure IoT ecosystems.
We identify key application areas, discuss major challenges, and propose optimization
strategies for resource-limited settings. Our primary contribution is a novel collaborative
embeddings offloading mechanism for IoT intrusion detection named SEED (Semantic
Embeddings for Efficient Detection). This system leverages a lightweight, fine-tuned BERT
model, chosen for its proven contextual and semantic understanding of sequences, to
generate rich network embeddings at the edge. A compact neural network deployed on
the end-device then queries these embeddings to assess network flow normality. This
architecture alleviates the computational burden of running a full transformer on the
device while capitalizing on its analytical performance. Our optimized BERT model is
reduced by approximately 90% from its original size, now representing approximately
41 MB, suitable for the Edge. The resulting compact neural network is a mere 137 KB,
appropriate for the IoT devices. This system achieves 99.9% detection accuracy with an
average inference time of under 70 ms on a standard CPU. Finally, the paper discusses
the ethical implications of LLM-IoT integration and evaluates the resilience of LLMs in
dynamic and adversarial environments.
Keywords: semantic embeddings; computation offloading; edge computing; BERT; artificial
intelligence of things; efficient intrusion detection
1. Introduction
Kevin Ashton, a pioneer in the field, once remarked: “The Internet of Things has the
potential to change the world, just as the internet did.”. This statement has become increas-
ingly relevant as we witness the widespread adoption of connected devices across nearly
every domain involving communication between entities, whether machines, humans, or
both; And according to trends, the number of connected devices is expected to exceed
40 billion by 2030 (https://iot-analytics.com/number-connected-iot-devices/ (28 October
2025)). This unprecedented growth is reshaping modern life, with transformative impacts
across domains such as smart homes, healthcare, transportation, and industrial systems.
Sensors 2026, 26, 356
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
2 of 22
More specifcally, in smart homes, IoT powered by machine learning in most of the cases
allows establishing an adaptive environment that aims to improve the safety, the efficiency
and the comfort of the users [1]. The miniaturization of these devices enables body net-
works and healthcare IoT equipped with sensors to track physiological parameters like
heart rate, muscle activity, and electrodermal responses, providing continuous real-time
feedback that supports early diagnosis and improved patient care and healthcare services
and enables remote health monitoring [2,3].
IoT technologies have also contributed significantly to energy management. Utiliz-
ing Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) and power line communication, smart grids and
IoT-enabled meters allow for the real-time monitoring and optimization of energy con-
sumption [4]. Such systems facilitate efficient demand-response mechanisms and dynamic
interactions between users and service providers. Looking at the field of smart cities,
IoT is transforming the urban landscapes into intelligent, responsive ecosystems, which
enhances the quality of life for citizens; it strengthens public safety through connected
surveillance and safeguards citizen well-being by continuously monitoring environemental
conditions [3].
However, the proliferation of connected devices also introduces an expansive attack
surface that attracts malicious actors. Cybercriminals increasingly exploit vulnerabilities in
IoT systems to disrupt operations, compromise user privacy, or exfiltrate sensitive data [5].
Traditional cybersecurity mechanisms often fall short in these environments due to the
heterogeneity and resource constraints of IoT devices, leaving them particularly vulnerable
to sophisticated threats, including zero-day exploits [6,7].
To address these challenges, artificial intelligence has emerged as a powerful tool for
securing IoT systems. Early AI approaches relied on static rule-based methods, which
proved inadequate for complex or high-dimensional data. Machine learning techniques
introduced adaptability through data-driven learning, and deep learning further extended
these capabilities by enabling advanced multimodal data processing through parallel
computing architectures.
Recent years have witnessed a surge in the application of artificial intelligence (AI)
to cybersecurity [8]. Among the most transformative developments are Large Language
Models (LLMs). These models are built upon the Transformer architecture, a class of
deep neural networks that relies on the self-attention mechanism [9]. This architecture has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in natural language processing due to its ability to
capture long-range contextual dependencies in sequential data, significantly outperforming
earlier models such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and long short-term memory
networks (LSTMs).
In network-related tasks, Transformer-based models exhibit strong potential for ap-
plications such as log analysis, threat detection, and incident response. However, their
effectiveness depends on appropriate data preprocessing, as raw network representations
(e.g., PCAP files) are not directly compatible with language models. To address this limita-
tion, network data can be transformed into textual representations using techniques such
as Privacy-Preserving Fixed-Length Encoding (PPFLE) combined with byte-pair encoding
(BPE) tokenization [10]. These transformations enable the construction of contextual repre-
sentations over network traffic, rendering the data exploitable by Transformer-based models.
The convergence of AI and the Internet of Things (IoT), commonly referred to as the
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) [11], seeks to leverage AI models, including LLMs,
to process the massive volumes of data generated by distributed IoT networks. Within this
context, securing IoT infrastructures against cyber threats has become a critical challenge.
In this work, we aim to develop an intrusion detection scheme that leverages the
rich representations embedded in network flow data. Specifically, we employ BERT [12],
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
3 of 22
an encoder-only Transformer model that is context-dependent and capable of generating
semantically rich embeddings based on token position and surrounding context [13]. BERT
is particularly well suited for downstream tasks involving sequential data, while remaining
open source, architecturally flexible for fine-tuning, and comparatively lightweight when
contrasted with more advanced encoder-only Transformer models. These characteristics
enable efficient deployment and improved inference time, which are critical requirements
for practical intrusion detection systems. Since these embeddings are inherently task-
dependent, we fine-tune the bert-base model to adapt its pretrained knowledge to the
network intrusion detection task.
Despite the promising potential of LLMs (which, in the academic context of this work,
broadly refer to Transformer-based models) for enhancing cybersecurity, particularly in IoT
settings, their deployment in resource-constrained and heterogeneous IoT environments
remains insufficiently explored. This gap motivates further investigation into efficient and
scalable learning frameworks tailored to such constrained scenarios.
To bridge the existing research gap, this paper makes the following key contributions:
•
We provide a structured overview grounded in the fundamentals of LLM-based cyber-
security for IoT systems, addressing the current lack of comprehensive frameworks in
this domain.
•
We establish the foundational concepts that support IoT security, including typical
IoT architectures, their associated vulnerabilities, and the emerging role of Large
Language Models in cybersecurity contexts.
•
We analyze the evolving threat landscape in IoT environments, identifying common
attack vectors and layer-specific vulnerabilities that challenge secure system design
and operation.
•
We present a detailed examination of LLM applications in IoT cybersecurity, which
includes anomaly and intrusion detection, threat intelligence, secure configuration
management, and human-in-the-loop security workflows.
•
We propose SEED (Semantic Embeddings for Efficient Detection), an approach that
leverages Edge-derived Transformer semantics to enable lightweight and accurate
intrusion detection on resource-constrained IoT devices. In SEED, a BERT-based
Transformer model is trained and deployed at the edge level, where it is reduced by
approximately 90% of its original size, resulting in a compact 41 MB model responsible
for generating rich semantic embeddings of network traffic. These embeddings are
then used to train a highly compact IoT-level neural network of only 137 KB, which
achieves up to 99% accuracy for both binary (normal vs. abnormal) and multi-category
threat detection tasks. The IoT-level classifier maintains an average inference latency
of under 70 ms on CPU hardware, demonstrating the practicality and efficiency of
SEED for real-world IoT deployments.
•
We illustrate the practical potential of LLMs in IoT cybersecurity through empirical
case studies, demonstrating improvements in threat detection accuracy and malware
analysis, particularly when hybrid or ensemble learning techniques are employed.
•
Finally, we discuss adversarial robustness and ethical implications of integrating LLMs
into IoT security systems, emphasizing the need for secure, interpretable, and resilient
model deployments, especially under changing or potentially hostile conditions.
2. Background and Related Work
This section provides an overview of IoT architectures and their associated security
requirements, followed by a discussion of the role of AI in cybersecurity and the recent
emergence of LLMs as transformative tools in this domain. It concludes by presenting
relevant works that have applied LLMs to various cybersecurity tasks.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
4 of 22
2.1. IoT Architectures and Security Needs
IoT systems are typically structured into three primary layers: the perception layer,
the network layer, and the application layer. Each of these plays a distinct role in enabling
data-driven services and presents unique security challenges. Figure 1 illustrates the
classical 3 layered IoT architecture with associated security challenges for each layer.
Figure 1. Layered IoT Architecture and Associated Security Challenges.
The perception layer consists of sensors, actuators and embedded devices that interact
directly with the physical environment. These components are often constrained in terms of
power, processing capabilities and memory, making them susceptible to physical tampering
and hardware-level attacks. Due to their limited computational capacity, these devices
frequently operate without robust encryption or authentication mechanisms, exposing
them to risks such as spoofing or side-channel attacks [7].
The network layer facilitates data transmission between devices and cloud or edge
infrastructures. It commonly employs lightweight communication protocols such as 6LoW-
PAN, Thread, Routing protocol for low-power and lossy Networks, Zigbee, LoRaWAN,
which are optimized for low-power and lossy networks. While these protocols support
efficient communication, they often trade off security for performance, lacking built-in
support for strong authentication, data integrity, or end-to-end encryption [5].
The application layer delivers user-facing services and integrates analytics and
decision-making functions. This layer must enforce secure access controls, data privacy poli-
cies, and trusted interactions with users and third-party systems. However, vulnerabilities
can emerge from poorly implemented APIs, weak user authentication schemes, or insecure
firmware updates [6]. Table 1 summarizes the security breaches and consequences for the
layers of the IoT architecture.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
5 of 22
Table 1. Common Vulnerabilities in IoT Architectures.
IoT Layer
Description
Typical
Vulnerabilities
Causes/Challenges
Consequences
Perception Layer
Devices that sense
and interact with the
physical
environment (e.g.,
sensors, actuators)
Physical tampering,
side-channel attacks,
firmware
manipulation
Low computational
power, lack of
hardware security,
absence of secure
boot mechanisms
Unauthorized data
access, device
malfunction,
insertion of
rogue devices
Network Layer
Ensures
communication
between devices and
external systems via
various protocols
Man-in-the-Middle
(MITM), spoofing,
sniffing, routing
attacks
Use of lightweight
protocols with
limited encryption,
dynamic and
decentralized
topologies
Data interception or
alteration, denial of
service,
routing manipulation
Application Layer
Interfaces and
services exposed to
users and external
applications
SQL injection,
Cross-Site Scripting
(XSS), insecure APIs,
privilege escalation
Poor input
validation, outdated
firmware, weak or
inconsistent access
control policies
Data leakage,
unauthorized access,
compromised
application behavior
2.2. Threats and Attack Surfaces
IoT devices are exposed to a wide range of cyberattacks that exploit their ubiqui-
tous connectivity and limited computational resources. These attacks can be categorized
according to the targeted component or layer of the system.
•
Physical Attacks: Involve direct manipulation of hardware components, including
tampering, jamming, and node capture.
•
Network Attacks: Target communication protocols through routing manipulation,
sniffing, Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) interception, and DoS/DDoS flooding [14].
•
Software Attacks: Exploit firmware or embedded code via malware injection, rootkits,
code injection, and privilege escalation.
•
Application-Layer Attacks: Focus on user-facing services, including XSS, SQL injection,
and phishing.
•
Authentication and Authorization Attacks: Aim to bypass access controls using brute
force, password cracking, and replay techniques.
2.3. Artificial Intelligence for Cybersecurity
AI has increasingly become integral to cybersecurity, offering scalable solutions to
detect, predict, and respond to threats in real time. Traditional rule-based systems, while
useful for known threats, often struggle to adapt to the dynamic and complex nature
of modern attack vectors. Machine learning techniques, particularly those that leverage
large volumes of behavioral and system data, provide more adaptive and context-aware
mechanisms for security enforcement.
Two primary learning paradigms are employed in AI-driven cybersecurity: supervised
learning and unsupervised learning. Supervised learning relies on labeled datasets to train
models capable of classifying known threats, such as in malware or phishing detection.
In contrast, unsupervised learning does not require labeled data and is commonly used for
anomaly detection, enabling systems to identify unusual patterns that may signify zero-day
attacks or insider threats [8].
Despite their promise, deep learning (DL) and other advanced ML techniques face sev-
eral limitations in cybersecurity contexts. Notably, DL models often require large volumes
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
6 of 22
of high-quality, labeled data, which are difficult to obtain in security settings due to privacy
constraints and the rarity of certain attack types. Furthermore, these models are susceptible
to model drift, where changes in attacker behavior or system configurations degrade the
model’s performance over time, necessitating frequent retraining and monitoring.
AI-powered approaches have found widespread use in applications such as malware
classification, phishing detection, and network anomaly detection. These systems analyze
static and dynamic features of executables, email contents, and traffic patterns to infer
malicious intent. However, the effectiveness of such models depends heavily on their
robustness to adversarial manipulation and the relevance of training data to evolving threat
landscapes [8].
2.4. LLM for Security and IoT
The proliferation of connected devices has revolutionized various sectors, enabling
a broad range of applications. Among the most prominent examples are voice assistants
such as Apple’s Siri and Amazon’s Alexa. Initially, these systems offered limited user-
friendliness due to their robotic and unnatural responses. The integration of LLMs has
significantly transformed human–machine interaction. Owing to their advanced natural lan-
guage understanding and generation capabilities, LLMs enable more fluid, context-aware,
and human-like conversations. As a result, user experiences have improved significantly.
Beyond conversational agents, the integration of AI and IoT has enabled intelligent, au-
tonomous decision-making across diverse domains. Traditional IoT systems relied heavily
on expert-defined rule sets, which, although functional, lacked scalability and adaptability.
With the advent of LLMs, this paradigm has shifted. In smart manufacturing, for instance,
LLM-empowered IoT systems can analyze sensor data in real time to optimize production
lines, detect anomalies, and recommend precise adjustments to enhance efficiency and
resource utilization.
Modern IoT devices are equipped with advanced sensors that generate vast quantities
of heterogeneous data. This data fuels applications ranging from gaze tracking using
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) [15] to depth estimation for XR, VR, and robotics.
Systems like RGBDGaze incorporate RGBD data for enhanced gaze estimation accuracy.
Furthermore, embedded cameras on drones or satellites enable 3D reconstruction of real-
world environments, crucial for applications in mapping and environmental monitoring.
Processing such complex and substantial data requires sophisticated computational
models. LLMs, especially in their multimodal variants, address this challenge by effec-
tively interpreting and correlating diverse data modalities, including text, images, audio,
and video [15]. This capability significantly enhances IoT applications, enabling more
context-aware, adaptive, and intelligent system behaviors.
In the field of education, LLMs and generative AI also offer solutions to the long-
standing challenge of personalized learning [16]. When combined with IoT-based student
monitoring systems, these models can dynamically generate educational content tailored to
individual cognitive and cultural profiles. Such AI-driven IoT frameworks offer promising
tools to reduce learning gaps and improve pedagogical outcomes.
2.5. Related Work
To assess the practical viability of LLMs in IoT security, this section highlights key stud-
ies demonstrating their effectiveness across various threat scenarios. Ref. [10] introduced
SecurityBERT, an LLM-based threat detection system for IoT and IIoT environments. Using
privacy-preserving fixed-length encoding (PPFLE) to preprocess traffic data, it achieved a
98.2% detection accuracy with sub-150 ms inference latency on an average CPU. Its com-
pact size (16.7 MB) makes it suitable for deployment on edge devices. Similarly, ref. [17]
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
7 of 22
employed fine-tuned LLMs to achieve 94.9% accuracy in DDoS detection, surpassing tradi-
tional MLPs in few-shot learning settings. These findings illustrate the capacity of LLMs to
detect sophisticated threats in resource-constrained environments. Ref. [18] evaluated BERT
and GPT-2 for malware detection using datasets such as TON-IoT [19] and NSL-KDD [20].
BERT consistently outperformed GPT-2, achieving up to 94.0% accuracy on TON-IoT due
to its encoder-only architecture, which enables more effective context modeling. However,
practical deployment challenges on IoT hardware were not addressed, indicating the need
for further work on model optimization.
In another study, ref. [6] proposed a hybrid architecture combining GPT-4 with autoen-
coders for enhanced preprocessing and interpretability. The LLM component recommends
preprocessing strategies and generates explanatory insights post-detection. Although the
model showed improved detection accuracy, the authors did not evaluate its deployability
on actual IoT devices. Ref. [21] explored an ensemble approach combining BART for packet
prediction and BERT for accuracy assessment, using the CICIoT2023 dataset [22]. BART
achieved 98.26% classification accuracy, while BERT provided robust contextual validation.
However, the study lacks a detailed analysis of training cost and inference latency, factors
critical for real-world IoT applications.
In our prior work [23], we applied federated learning with a lightweight BERT vari-
ant for intrusion detection on IoT devices. Unlike centralized learning approaches, our
method trains models locally and aggregates parameters globally to preserve data privacy.
Although parameter transfer (1.17 million parameters) introduced delays, reducing the
model depth significantly improved responsiveness, making the approach feasible for
edge deployments.
A prevalent shortcoming in the existing literature is the insufficient consideration of
the resource-constrained nature of IoT devices, which are typically characterized by limited
battery life and storage capacity. This limitation necessitates the development of solutions
that are not only accurate but also highly efficient in terms of energy and memory utilization.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel approach that offloads the computationally intensive
feature learning phase from the constrained devices, as summarized in Table 2. Our
methodology leverages the superior representational capacity of a transformer model,
which is trained in a resource-rich environment. The acquired knowledge is then transfer
into a compact Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFNN) deployed on the IoT device. This
strategy achieves an optimal balance between high detection performance and minimal
resource consumption.
Table 2. Comparative summary of case studies on LLM applications in IoT cybersecurity, highlighting
results and limitations.
Study
Model(s)
Dataset
Key Contribution
Limitations
[10], 2024
SecurityBERT
EdgeIIoTset
98.2%/Privacy-
preserving intrusion
detection for IoT/IIoT
Lacks real-world
deployment analysis;
adversarial robustness
not evaluated
[18], 2024
BERT, GPT-2
TON-IoT, NSL-KDD,
KDDcup99
94.0% (BERT), 91.0%
(GPT-2)/IoT malware
detection using LLMs
No consideration for
deployability;
scalability issues
[23], 2024
Federated
SecurityBERT
EdgeIIoTset
97.7%/Quantized
model for deployment
on resource-constrained
devices
High communication
overhead; delayed
model aggregation
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
8 of 22
Table 2. Cont.
Study
Model(s)
Dataset
Key Contribution
Limitations
[6], 2025
GPT-4 + Autoencoders
KDDcup99 10%
Hybrid AI-based
anomaly detection;
improved over classical
methods
High computational
cost; real-time inference
feasibility not evaluated
[21], 2025
BART, BERT
CICIoT2023
98.26% (BART), 92.8%
(BERT)/Packet
classification and
intrusion prevention
No discussion on
computational demand
for IoT deployment
Ours
SEED
EdgeIIoTset
Edge-IoT collaborative
IDS using tuned BERT
(90% reduced model)
for embedding
generation; 137 KB IoT
classifier achieving
99.99%; efficient
six-category and binary
IoT detection
Relies on stable
network connection for
embedding querying;
edge dependency may
impact inference under
network instability
3. Applications of LLMs for IoT Cybersecurity
LLMs, with their advanced reasoning and natural language capabilities, are increas-
ingly used to address the cybersecurity challenges of the IoT. This section explores the
major application areas of LLMs in IoT security, including threat detection, log analysis,
secure configuration, and interactive support for human operators.
3.1. Anomaly and Intrusion Detection
LLMs have demonstrated strong potential in detecting abnormal behaviors in network
traffics. Models such as BERT and GPT-2 have been applied to analyze network traffic
for identifying deviations from baseline behavior [18]. For instance, ref. [10] developed
SecurityBERT, a lightweight model with 98.2% detection accuracy and sub-150ms inference
time, suitable for edge environments.
Hybrid approaches combining LLMs with autoencoders have also been proposed.
Ref. [6] used GPT-4 to guide anomaly detection and recommend preprocessing strategies,
improving explainability and detection accuracy. Ensemble architectures, such as those
by [21], integrate BART for packet prediction with BERT for validation, achieving over 98%
accuracy on CICIoT2023 dataset.
3.2. Threat Intelligence and Log Analysis
One of the most promising use cases for LLMs in IoT cybersecurity is the automated
extraction and summarization of cyber threat intelligence. Fine-tuned on structured datasets
like MITRE ATT&CK or CAPEC, LLMs can produce comprehensive threat reports, interpret
attack patterns, and generate context-aware incident descriptions [24]. These outputs help
improve situational awareness and assist in identifying emerging attack trends.
Furthermore, LLMs are increasingly used to parse and interpret large-scale log files,
correlating events across time and systems. Their contextual understanding enables them to
generate incident summaries that are both technically accurate and readable by human analysts.
3.3. Secure Configuration and Policy Generation
LLMs also contribute to identifying misconfigurations and suggesting secure alterna-
tives in IoT environments. They can detect vulnerabilities in configuration scripts, code
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
9 of 22
snippets, and deployment templates, especially those obfuscated to evade static analy-
sis [6,8]. Emerging models like SecureFalcon [25] improve interpretability and reduce false
positives during automated security audits.
Moreover, LLMs can be fine-tuned to generate security policies or hardening guides
tailored to specific IoT platforms or device constraints, enabling scalable and proactive
security design.
3.4. Human-in-the-Loop: Security Assistants and ChatOps
Beyond automated analysis, LLMs serve as natural language-based assistants that
support human analysts in real-time decision-making. Their ability to explain security
alerts in plain language, provide incident summaries, and recommend responsive actions
allows for faster and more informed interventions [6].
This aligns with the emerging practice of ChatOps, where human analysts interact with
automated systems via chat-based interfaces. LLMs embedded into such workflows enable
collaborative threat investigation, knowledge base querying, and real-time documentation
generation, bridging the gap between automation and human expertise.
4. SEED Framework
In this section, we present our proposed SEED scheme, which leverages the computa-
tional power of BERT models at the edge level to train a compact neural network deployed
at the IoT level for efficient traffic prediction and anomaly detection.
4.1. System Overview
This subsection provides a conceptual overview of the SEED architecture presented
in Figure 2, highlighting the interaction between the edge-based BERT model and the
resource-constrained IoT devices.
Figure 2. Overview of the SEED architecture, where a compressed edge-level Transformer model
generates semantic embeddings that are offloaded to a lightweight IoT-level classifier for efficient
intrusion detection.
As discussed previously, Transformer-based models such as BERT have demonstrated
outstanding performance in diverse tasks involving sequential data processing [10,21].
However, their high computational and memory requirements render their direct de-
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
10 of 22
ployment on IoT devices impractical, as such environments typically lack the necessary
resources (e.g., GPUs) for large-scale model training and inference.
To address these limitations, we propose a collaborative Edge-to-IoT learning scheme,
referred to as SEED, in which a Transformer-based model is trained at the edge layer, while
a compact neural network is deployed at the IoT layer. Compared to IoT devices, edge
nodes offer significantly greater computational resources, enabling the training of a BERT-
based intrusion detection model capable of learning rich and generalized representations
of network traffic patterns across multiple attack types.
Since networks generate unstructured and vast amoung of data that make it difficult
to extract direct insights [26], the edge-level model encodes network traffic in a high-
dimensional embedding space, thus capturing complex semantic relationships between
packet-level features. As stated earlier, raw network data are not directly exploitable
by transformer-based models. To overcome this limitation, Algorithm 1 converts the
network dataset into a textual representation by concatenating each feature name with
its corresponding feature value, separated by a predefined marker (“$” in our case). This
process is applied uniformly across the entire dataset.
Algorithm 1 Data preprocessing: feature-wise textual serialization
Input: Dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1
Input: Feature set F
▷selected features to encode
Input: Hash function H(·)
▷privacy-preserving fixed-length encoder
Output: Serialized corpus S = {si}N
i=1
1: Initialize S ←[ ]
2: for (xi, yi) ∈D do
3:
Initialize token list Ti ←[ ]
4:
for f ∈F do
5:
v ←xi[ f ]
▷value of feature f in sample xi
6:
t ←H( f ∥$ ∥toString(v))
7:
Append t to Ti
8:
end for
9:
si ←join(Ti, ””)
▷space-separated token sequence
10:
Append si to S
11: end for
12: return S
Once the textual corpus is constructed, a new vocabulary of size 32,522 (corresponding
to the default BERT vocabulary size) is learned from scratch based on this newly formed
context. Consequently, the model is trained exclusively on this domain-specific vocabulary,
allowing it to learn deep semantic representations tailored to network traffic data. Unlike
the approach in [27], our method does not rely on dataset matching. Instead, the proposed
preprocessing strategy can be applied to multiple heterogeneous datasets (e.g., IoT traffic
and traditional network traffic), enabling the construction of a broader contextual space to
enable a more flexible and generalizable intrusion detection system.
The key idea is to exploit these embeddings to bridge the performance–efficiency gap
between edge and IoT. Once trained, the edge model generates embeddings for incoming
IoT traffic and transmits them to the IoT level, where a lightweight neural network processes
the embedding vectors instead of raw packet features. In our framework, we use the
condensed representation produced by BERT as the embedding of each network traffic
sample (processed as batch of size Bsize), specifically the hidden state associated with the
[CLS] token from the final encoder layer due to its compactness. Our confirmation outputs
an embedding vector with a fixed-length of dimension 256, which serves as a global, context-
aware representation of the entire input sequence. The inference performed by the IoT-side
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
11 of 22
model classifies traffic instances as benign or anomalous and even performs fine-grained
classification, enabling near real-time detection with minimal computational overhead.
The overall workflow is summarized by two core processes. Algorithm 2 depicts the
training process of the BERT model at the edge level. In this phase, the model learns to
classify various types of attacks while concurrently learning to represent network flows
in a high-dimensional space. Algorithm 3 outlines the lightweight model inference at the
IoT level. Here, instead of processing raw network flows directly, which can be compu-
tationally intensive due to the feature learning phase, the model requests the embedding
representation of these flows from the EdgeBERT model. It then trains a Feed-Forward
Neural Network (FFNN) on these rich semantic embeddings. Finally, the model classifies
traffic as anomalous by comparing the output probability of the classification head with a
threshold τ (typically set to 0.5 for binary classification).
Algorithm 2 Edge-Level BERT Model Training and Embedding Generation
Input: Dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 of network traffic samples
Output: Trained BERT model MBERT
1: Initialize BERT-base model MBERT with pre-trained weights
2: for each mini-batch (xb, yb) in D do
3:
xb into input sequence sb
▷Tokenize and encode
4:
hb = MBERT(sb)
▷Compute hidden representations
5:
ˆyb = f (hb)
▷Compute classification output
6:
L = CrossEntropy( ˆyb, yb)
▷Compute the loss
7:
Update MBERT parameters via backpropagation
8: end for
9: Freeze the trained model parameters
10: return MBERT
Algorithm 3 IoT-Level Lightweight Neural Network Inference
Input: Compact neural network MIoT
Input: Incoming IoT traffic sample xi
Output: Predicted class label ˆyi ∈[0, 1]
1: ei = MBERT(xi)
▷Embeddings request, processing and transmission
2: ˆyi = MIoT(ei)
▷Compute prediction score
3: if ˆyi ≥τ then
4:
Classify traffic as anomalous
5: else
6:
Classify traffic as benign
7: end if
8: return ˆyi
4.2. Compression in SEED
Given the large size and computational demands of LLMs, compression techniques
are vital to making them compatible with IoT constraints. These techniques reduce memory
usage and inference latency while maintaining acceptable performance.
Quantization
Quantization involves reducing the numerical precision of model weights, which
are typically represented in 32-bit floating-point (FP32) format. By converting weights
to lower-precision formats such as 8-bit integers (int8) or 4-bit (int4), quantization can
reduce model size by a factor of four to eight [11]. This results in lower memory and
energy consumption during inference. However, this compression may introduce minor
degradation in model accuracy due to reduced precision, particularly in sensitive layers.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
12 of 22
Pruning
Pruning techniques eliminate redundant or non-critical parameters from the neural
network. These methods exploit the observation that not all weights contribute equally
to model performance. By removing near-zero or low-impact weights, pruning reduces
both model size and computational burden. However, as this process alters the model’s
structure, fine-tuning is typically required post-pruning to recover potential performance
loss and ensure inference stability.
Knowledge Distillation
Knowledge distillation transfers knowledge from a large, high-performing teacher
model to a smaller, efficient student model [28]. The student learns to replicate the behavior
of the teacher, retaining much of the original performance while being significantly smaller
and faster. This approach is particularly suitable for resource-constrained devices that
cannot accommodate full-scale LLMs.
4.3. On-Device and Edge Deployment Strategy
Beyond model compression, architectural innovations have been introduced to accom-
modate LLM deployment in constrained edge environments. Researchers have proposed
several strategies to minimize latency, optimize resource use, and preserve operational
privacy, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Deployment strategies for LLMs in IoT environments [29].
Edge Offloading
Edge computing offers a promising paradigm wherein computational tasks are par-
tially or fully offloaded from IoT endpoints to nearby edge servers. Instead of executing
LLM inference directly on the device, IoT systems can send requests to more capable nodes,
which process the queries and return results [29]. This approach significantly reduces
on-device load but introduces concerns around network latency and availability.
In [30], the authors proposed Edge-LLM, a framework for efficient edge-based LLM
deployment. It introduces a Layer-wise Unified Compression (LUC) technique to apply
layer-specific pruning and quantization. Furthermore, an Adaptive Layer Tuning and
Voting scheme reduces memory demands during backpropagation. Coupled with an
efficient hardware scheduler, this framework achieved a 2.92× speedup and 4× mem-
ory reduction with negligible performance loss, demonstrating its feasibility for on-edge
LLM deployment.
Edge-Based and Hybrid Architectures
When edge devices are unable to support inference entirely, edge-based or hybrid
solutions are essential. In hybrid models, certain inference stages are performed at the
edge, while computationally intensive tasks are handled in the cloud. For instance, ref. [31]
proposed a collaborative edge-cloud model in which edge devices generate tokens serially,
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 13 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
13 of 22
while cloud systems handle token generation in parallel. This architecture reduces total re-
sponse time while balancing the trade-offs between performance, latency, and resource use.
Lightweight LLM Variants
An alternative strategy involves using optimized lightweight versions of standard
LLMs. Models such as TinyBERT, DistilBERT, and MobileBERT retain core capabilities
while drastically reducing parameter count. For instance, TinyBERT achieves up to 96%
of BERT’s performance while being 7× smaller and 9× faster. Similarly, recent variants
like Gemini Nano and GPT-2 Small are tailored for on-device deployment with acceptable
trade-offs in accuracy [29].
Caching and Efficient Inference
In [32], authors covered strategies such as edge LLM caching, gradient checkpointing,
and attention optimization, which are essential for deploying LLMs in low-latency, privacy-
sensitive applications. The authors also identify key use cases including robotics, healthcare,
and smart cities, that benefit from edge-based LLM deployment.
4.4. Privacy-Preserving Design
IoT devices frequently process sensitive personal, environmental, and behavioral
data. As such, the integration of LLMs must address privacy and data security concerns.
Decentralized learning frameworks and secure update mechanisms offer viable solutions.
Federated Learning
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized training paradigm that allows models to be
trained directly on IoT devices. Instead of transmitting raw data, devices only send model
updates to a central aggregator [23,33]. This approach reduces privacy risks by keeping
sensitive data local. In the context of LLMs, FL enables continual fine-tuning of models
on-device while benefiting from global knowledge sharing.
Secure Model Updates
To enhance the privacy guarantees of FL, additional safeguards such as differential
privacy and homomorphic encryption can be applied. Differential privacy introduces
calibrated noise into model updates to prevent reverse-engineering of individual data
points. Homomorphic encryption enables computation on encrypted data, ensuring that
no sensitive information is exposed during training or inference.
Although these strategies significantly improve the feasibility of deploying LLMs
in IoT settings, continuous research is essential to address remaining limitations. These
include reducing fine-tuning overhead, handling variable network conditions in hybrid
models, and developing new architectures that are natively optimized for edge intelligence.
5. Experimental Evaluation
5.1. Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed SEED approach, we utilized the widely
adopted Edge-IIoTset dataset [34], which contains traffic data from IoT and IIoT systems,
including 14 distinct attack types along with normal traffic, yielding 15 classes in total.
We designed three evaluation scenarios:
1.
Binary classification scenario: Distinguishes between benign and anomalous traffic.
2.
Six-category scenario: Groups attacks into six intermediate categories (five attacks +
Normal traffic).
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 14 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
14 of 22
3.
Fifteen-class scenario: Performs fine-grained classification across all 14 attack types
plus normal traffic.
The first two scenarios (binary and six-category) are intended for execution at the IoT
level, leveraging the compact neural network, while the fifteen-class scenario is handled by
the large edge-based model due to its higher computational requirements.
Figure 4 illustrates the hierarchical mapping of attack techniques included in the
dataset to broader threat categories and finally to anomaly classifications. The visualization
demonstrates how individual attacks are grouped into intermediate categories, which are
then aggregated into the final classification outputs.
Figure 4. EdgeIIoTset Network Attacks Taxonomy.
The sive-category scenario is particularly relevant at the IoT level because it captures
the most critical IoT threats while remaining computationally efficient for edge devices.
This approach balances fine-grained detection with the limited memory and processing
capabilities of IoT hardware, providing comprehensive coverage of major IoT threat vectors
without overwhelming resource-constrained devices.
Table 3 summarizes the configurations of our SEED models. The EdgeBERT model
consists of 4 encoder layers with 256 hidden units, 512 intermediate units, 4 attention heads,
and 2 fully connected layers, resulting in over 10 million parameters [23]. The IoT-level
classifiers are compact, consisting of two fully connected layers with batch normalization
and dropout; the binary and five-category models contain only 33k and 34k parameters,
respectively, making them suitable for deployment on resource-constrained IoT devices.
Table 3. SEED Model Configurations, Parameters, and Memory Sizes.
Model
Architecture
Parameters
Memory Size
EdgeBERT
4 encoder layers, hidden 256,
intermediate 512, 4 heads, 2 FC layers
(256 × 128, 128 × 15)
10,154,767
40.6 MB
IoT Binary Classifier
2 FC layers (256 × 128, 128 × 1),
1 batch norm (128)
33,281
137 KB
IoT 5-Category Classifier
Same as binary classifier, output 5
33,926
137 KB
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 15 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
15 of 22
For the Edge-Level model training, we utilized a high-performance server equipped
with an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80 GB of memory, 12 CPU cores, and a total computing
power of 312 TFLOPs. To accelerate experiments related to IoT-level model training, we
employed an NVIDIA T4 GPU with 16 GB of RAM, 4 CPU cores, and a peak performance
of 65 TFLOPs. It is worth noting that the T4 was used solely to speed up training; the IoT
models are lightweight enough that they can also be trained on a standard CPU, with longer
training times.
To evaluate the performance of our SEED models, we used standard classification
metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. These metrics are defined
as follows:
•
Accuracy measures the proportion of correctly classified instances among all samples:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(1)
•
Precision quantifies the proportion of correctly predicted positive instances among all
instances predicted as positive:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2)
•
Recall measures the proportion of correctly predicted positive instances among all
actual positive instances:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3)
•
F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a balanced metric for
classification performance:
F1-score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(4)
Here, TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the number of true positives, true negatives, false
positives, and false negatives, respectively.
5.2. Results and Discussion
The evaluation begins with assessing the performance of the EdgeBERT model. It
was trained on the entire training set of the Edge-IIoTset dataset for approximately 15 min
on an NVIDIA A100 GPU, corresponding to one epoch. For comparison, training the full
BERT-base model on the same dataset would have required an estimated 3.5 h per epoch.
After training, EdgeBERT achieved nearly 100% accuracy.
Figure 5 shows the variation of loss and accuracy every 1000 mini-batches during
training. Due to the density of the dataset, the model converged rapidly, with convergence
effectively reached around the 4000th mini-batch. This fast convergence eliminated the
need for additional epochs. Considering both training time and performance, EdgeBERT
represents an effective trade-off, as the full BERT model with over 100 million parameters
is not strictly necessary for intrusion detection in this context.
Figure 6 illustrates the confusion matrix for the 15-class classification scenario.
The model is able to almost perfectly distinguish between all classes, although a small
amount of confusion is observed between the ‘Fingerprinting’ and ‘DDoS-HTTP’ classes.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 16 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
16 of 22
Figure 5. Loss and Accuracy variation of EdgeBERT every 1000 mini batches.
Figure 6. EdgeBERT confusion matrix on 15 classes.
Table 4 presents the classification report for the Edge-level model. These results
highlight the effectiveness of the transformer-based architecture in distinguishing and
classifying a broad range of attack types. However, the Fingerprinting class exhibits the
lowest performance, with an F1-score of 0.9673. This behavior is partly explained by its
relatively small number of instances, which biases the model toward predicting the most
semantically similar classes.
Interestingly, other minority classes such as MITM achieve strong performance despite
their limited support. This indicates that class imbalance is not the only contributing
factor; the semantic separability between classes also plays a crucial role. When two
attack types share similar structural or behavioral patterns, the embedding space becomes
less discriminative, making fine-grained separation more challenging. In the case of
Fingerprinting, its proximity to certain DDoS-related patterns likely contributes to the
observed confusion.
At the IoT level, the compact 137 KB neural network achieves an accuracy of 99.99%
by following the process outlined in Algorithms 2 and 3. During inference, the IoT model
queries the edge-based model to obtain embedding vectors, which are then used as input
features for classification. These embeddings are rich and high-dimensional, capturing
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 17 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
17 of 22
the semantic characteristics of network traffic, which enables the IoT model to effectively
discriminate between different traffic categories.
Table 4. Classification Report for the Edge Model Network.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Support
Backd
1.0000
0.9992
0.9996
4972
HTTP
0.9992
1.0000
0.9996
9982
ICMP
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
23,287
TCP
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
10,012
UDP
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
24,314
Finge
0.9746
0.9600
0.9673
200
MITM
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
243
Norm
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
96,939
Pass
0.9992
1.0000
0.9996
10,031
Port
0.9998
1.0000
0.9999
4513
Rans
0.9995
0.9982
0.9989
2185
SQL
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
10,241
Upload
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
7527
Vul
1.0000
1.0000
0.9996
10,022
XSS
0.9997
1.0000
0.9998
3183
This level of abstraction is particularly suitable for resource-constrained IoT devices.
By relying on precomputed embeddings from the edge, the IoT model eliminates the need
for local feature extraction and other computationally intensive operations required for
fine-grained classification, while still maintaining near-perfect accuracy.
Figure 7 illustrates the model’s performance across the five-category scenario. Training
the IoT model required approximately 20 min per epoch on a CPU, and convergence
was achieved after only two epochs. This demonstrates the efficiency and feasibility of
deploying EdgeBERT-derived embeddings on lightweight IoT models, achieving both high
accuracy and low computational overhead.
An important consideration in this setup is the network data rate, which directly
impacts inference latency. On average, the edge-based model generates embedding batches
in 9 ms, while the IoT-level model performs classification in 70 ms on a 2.5 GHz CPU
with 4 cores. Table 5 summarizes these metrics. These latency magnitudes align well
with real-world IoT requirements, ensuring rapid decision-making and responsiveness.
However, a potential bottleneck in this pipeline is the network data rate, which is crucial
for transferring the generated embeddings from the edge to the IoT devices. Insufficient
throughput or unstable connectivity may increase transmission delays, limiting how quickly
the IoT-level model can perform inference.
Table 5. End-to-End Latency Summary for SEED Inference Pipeline.
Component
Latency
Edge-based model embedding generation
9 ms
IoT-level classifier inference (CPU, 2.5 GHz, 4 cores) *
70 ms
IoT-level classifier inference (NVIDIA T4 GPU)
0.9 ms
* The resource-constrained device for real-world deployment.
As shown in Figure 8, the IoT-level binary classifier further demonstrates the robust-
ness of our scheme by accurately flagging anomalous traffic instances. This confirms our
proposed SEED framework is both computationally efficient and effective for real-time
intrusion detection at the network edge.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 18 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
18 of 22
Figure 7. IoT level 5-attacks classification scenario.
Figure 8. IoT binary classification scenario.
While promising, the proposed method also presents several limitations that must
be addressed for real-world deployment. A primary concern lies in the transmission of
embeddings from the edge to IoT devices. Each embedding vector consists of 256 FP32 val-
ues (approximately 1 KB), which is lightweight in storage but may impose non-negligible
communication demands, especially under constrained or unstable network conditions.
Since real-world IoT networks are prone to latency, interference, and bandwidth fluctua-
tions, maintaining continuous embedding transfers may become a performance bottleneck.
Future work should therefore investigate mitigation strategies such as local caching, tem-
porary buffering of embeddings, or adaptive communication schedules.
Another important consideration relates to the communication strategy between IoT
devices and the edge, particularly during Step 2 of the SEED pipeline illustrated in Figure 2.
In our experimental setup, embeddings are requested in batches of size B during inference
to optimize throughput. However, determining the optimal batch size and more generally,
when communication should be initiated, remains a non-trivial design choice. Excessively
frequent communication may overload the network, whereas overly large batches may
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 19 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
19 of 22
introduce latency. Exploring dynamic batching or event-triggered communication policies
represents a promising direction for improving system efficiency.
Finally, the embeddings transmitted over the network may be susceptible to inter-
ception or reverse engineering, potentially revealing sensitive device metadata such as
IP addresses or traffic characteristics. Because many IoT communication protocols are
lightweight and lack robust built-in security mechanisms, incorporating additional pro-
tection layers (e.g., encryption, secure channels, or embedding obfuscation) is essential
to preserve confidentiality and prevent data leakage. Addressing these challenges will
be key to ensuring a secure and reliable deployment of the SEED framework in practical
IoT environments.
It is also crucial to account for network reliability. Designing fallback mechanisms
or jump strategies can help ensure continuous service availability, mitigating inference
delays or failures caused by intermittent connectivity. Such measures are fundamental to
maintaining robust and dependable intrusion detection in practical IoT deployments.
The above results demonstrate the viability of our method, though there remains
significant room for improvement, as discussed in the results analysis. With the integration
of these enhancements, particularly advancements in the communication strategy between
the two-tier architecture, our approach will be able to operate more efficiently, robustly,
and securely within real-world IoT environments.
While LLMs offer exceptional performance and significant advantages, they are not
fully reliable, and blind reliance on their outputs can introduce risks. It is therefore essential
to evaluate the ethical considerations and privacy implications associated with the use of
LLMs in general and within cybersecurity applications in particular.
6. Ethic and Privacy
The integration of LLMs into IoT security raises significant ethical considerations
that must be addressed to ensure the safety and privacy of users [35]. As LLMs become
more prevalent in managing and securing IoT devices, they can inadvertently introduce
vulnerabilities that malicious actors might exploit. For instance, the ethical implications
of prompt injection and jailbreaking can lead to unauthorized access to sensitive data,
compromising user privacy and trust. The exposure of Personally Identifiable Information
(PII) through LLM interactions can have severe consequences, as it may lead to identity theft
or other forms of exploitation. Moreover, the potential for LLMs to generate or facilitate the
dissemination of harmful content, such as hate speech or sexually explicit material, poses
ethical dilemmas regarding the responsibility of developers and organizations in mitigating
these risks. To address these challenges, it is crucial to develop robust ethical frameworks
and evaluative tools that guide the design and deployment of LLMs in IoT environments.
Such tools can help ensure that LLMs operate within ethical norms and align with societal
values, thereby fostering trust among users. By scrutinizing LLM responses and comparing
them to expected human behaviors in moral contexts, developers can better understand
the ethical dimensions of their systems and implement necessary safeguards. Ultimately,
the ethical use of LLMs in IoT security is not just about preventing misuse; it is about
cultivating a responsible approach that prioritizes user safety and privacy while harnessing
the benefits of advanced technologies [36]. Additionally, the identification of key features
of LLM-based agents can inform the development of strategies to mitigate risks, ensuring
that ethical considerations are integrated into the design process.
Furthermore, the growing use of LLMs in sensitive situations raises serious questions
about their robustness and adversarial dangers in IoT security applications. Research shows
that although while LLMs are being incorporated into a number of applications, there are
serious concerns associated with their susceptibility to hostile attacks. LLMs like GPT-3.5
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 20 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
20 of 22
and GPT-4 exhibit varying robustness against adversarial attacks such as misclassification
and hallucination, with updates not always ensuring improved security [37]. These attacks
can significantly degrade LLM performance, underscoring the need for enhanced safety
mechanisms. In the context of IoT systems, especially for intrusion detection, the integration
of LLMs presents additional vulnerabilities, as the diverse architectures of IoT networks
are particularly susceptible to adversarial exploitation [38]. To address these challenges,
strategies like adversarial training and input preprocessing have demonstrated up to a
15% improvement in model accuracy in cybersecurity applications [39]. Furthermore,
simplified model architectures such as Gated Linear Attention (GLA) Transformers may
offer a practical balance between robustness and efficiency for resource-constrained IoT
environments [40]. Despite these risks, LLMs hold significant promise for enhancing IoT
security through improved decision-making and anomaly detection, emphasizing the need
for ongoing research to develop resilient models capable of adapting to evolving threats.
7. Conclusions and Future Work
The integration of LLMs into IoT cybersecurity represents a transformative oppor-
tunity to enhance threat detection, automate security policies, and enable intelligent,
context-aware defense mechanisms across heterogeneous IoT environments. Prior studies
have demonstrated that LLM-based systems can improve anomaly detection, log analy-
sis, and malware classification, particularly when combined with hybrid architectures or
privacy-preserving techniques such as federated learning.
In this work, we introduced a practical and efficient Edge-IoT scheme—SEED. Our
method leverages a lightweight IoT-level neural network that operates on Edge-generated
embeddings, thereby achieving high accuracy of 99.99% with minimal computational and
memory requirements on the IoT device. The proposed pipeline enables fine-grained
semantic representation of traffic at the Edge level while preserving rapid, low-overhead
detection at the IoT edge. Experimental results demonstrated that our EdgeBERT can
accurately discriminate among 14 attack classes, while the IoT-level models achieved near-
perfect performance in both binary and six-category scenarios. These results highlight
the feasibility of integrating transformer knowledge into constrained IoT environments
without sacrificing detection performance.
Despite its promising performance, the proposed architecture introduces challenges
related to embedding transmission and network reliability. Moreover, embedding vectors
may reveal sensitive device information if intercepted, and dependency on edge connectiv-
ity can impact inference latency during network disruptions. Addressing these limitations
will require secure communication protocols, embedding anonymization mechanisms,
and robust fallback strategies to ensure continuous operation.
Future research should explore advanced privacy-preserving embedding techniques,
optimized on-device transformer variants, and adaptive edge–IoT load balancing strategies.
Further attention should also be given to adversarial robustness, interpretability, and the
ethical implications of autonomous security decisions. As IoT deployments continue to
expand, the development of lightweight, secure, and resilient LLM-powered defenses will
become increasingly essential for protecting large-scale interconnected systems.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.A., M.E. and L.M.-B.; methodology, F.A.; software, F.A.,
validation, M.E. and L.M.-B.; formal analysis, M.E.; investigation, F.A.; writing—original draft prepa-
ration, F.A.; writing—review and ediditin, M.E., L.M.-B. and F.A.; visualization, F.A.; supervision,
M.E. and L.M.-B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by SAINT JEAN INGENIEUR.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 21 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
21 of 22
Data Availability Statement:
The data used in this study can be found on IEEE DataPort
at https://ieee-dataport.org//documents/edge-iiotset-new-comprehensive-realistic-cyber-security-
dataset-iot-and-iiot-applications (accessed on 28 October 2025).
Acknowledgments: The authors express their gratitude to Saint Jean Ingenieur, a Cameroonian
Private Institution of Higher Education, for their generous funding and support, which made this
research possible.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Gad, M.M.; Gad, W.; Abdelkader, T.; Naik, K. Personalized Smart Home Automation Using Machine Learning: Predicting User
Activities. Sensors 2025, 25, 6082. [CrossRef]
2.
Singh, G. Wearable IoT (w-IoT) artificial intelligence (AI) solution for sustainable smart-healthcare. Int. J. Inf. Manag. Data
Insights 2025, 5, 100291. [CrossRef]
3.
Alfahaid, A.; Alalwany, E.; Almars, A.M.; Alharbi, F.; Atlam, E.; Mahgoub, I. Machine Learning-Based Security Solutions for IoT
Networks: A Comprehensive Survey. Sensors 2025, 25, 3341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Pandiyan, P.; Saravanan, S.; Kannadasan, R.; Krishnaveni, S.; Alsharif, M.H.; Kim, M.K. A comprehensive review of advancements
in green IoT for smart grids: Paving the path to sustainability. Energy Rep. 2024, 11, 5504–5531. [CrossRef]
5.
Oranekwu, I.; Elluri, L.; Batra, G. Automated Knowledge Framework for IoT Cybersecurity Compliance. In Proceedings of the
2024 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), Washington, DC, USA, 15–18 December 2024; IEEE: New York, NY,
USA, 2024; pp. 6336–6345.
6.
Ghimire, A.; Ghajari, G.; Gurung, K.; Sah, L.K.; Amsaad, F. Enhancing Cybersecurity in Critical Infrastructure with LLM-Assisted
Explainable IoT Systems. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2503.03180.
7.
Kasri, W.; Himeur, Y.; Alkhazaleh, H.A.; Tarapiah, S.; Atalla, S.; Mansoor, W.; Al-Ahmad, H. From Vulnerability to Defense: The
Role of Large Language Models in Enhancing Cybersecurity. Computation 2025, 13, 30. [CrossRef]
8.
Hasanov, I.; Virtanen, S.; Hakkala, A.; Isoaho, J. Application of Large Language Models in Cybersecurity: A Systematic Literature
Review. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 176751–176778. [CrossRef]
9.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.N.; Kaiser, Ł.; Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 30, 6000–6010.
10.
Ferrag, M.A.; Ndhlovu, M.; Tihanyi, N.; Cordeiro, L.C.; Debbah, M.; Lestable, T.; Thandi, N.S. Revolutionizing cyber threat
detection with large language models: A privacy-preserving bert-based lightweight model for iot/iiot devices. IEEE Access 2024,
12, 23733–23750. [CrossRef]
11.
Xiao, B.; Kantarci, B.; Kang, J.; Niyato, D.; Guizani, M. Efficient prompting for llm-based generative internet of things. IEEE
Internet Things J. 2024, 12, 778–791. [CrossRef]
12.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers); Association for Computational Linguistics: Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2019;
pp. 4171–4186.
13.
Alshattnawi, S.; Shatnawi, A.; AlSobeh, A.M.; Magableh, A.A. Beyond word-based model embeddings: Contextualized
representations for enhanced social media spam detection. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2254. [CrossRef]
14.
Adam, M.; Hammoudeh, M.; Alrawashdeh, R.; Alsulaimy, B. A survey on security, privacy, trust, and architectural challenges in
IoT systems. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 57128–57149. [CrossRef]
15.
Mo, S.; Salakhutdinov, R.; Morency, L.P.; Liang, P.P. Iot-lm: Large multisensory language models for the internet of things. arXiv
2024, arXiv:2407.09801.
16.
Dong, W.; Pan, D.; Kim, S. Exploring the integration of IoT and Generative AI in English language education: Smart tools for
personalized learning experiences. J. Comput. Sci. 2024, 82, 102397. [CrossRef]
17.
Zong, M.; Hekmati, A.; Guastalla, M.; Li, Y.; Krishnamachari, B. Integrating large language models with internet of things:
Applications. Discov. Internet Things 2025, 5, 2. [CrossRef]
18.
Omar, M.; Zangana, H.M.; Al-Karaki, J.N.; Mohammed, D. Harnessing LLMs for IoT Malware Detection: A Comparative Analysis
of BERT and GPT-2. In Proceedings of the 2024 8th International Symposium on Multidisciplinary Studies and Innovative
Technologies (ISMSIT), Ankara, Turkiye, 7–9 November 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 1–6.
19.
Sharafaldin, I.; Lashkari, A.H.; Ghorbani, A.A. Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy—ICISSP,
Funchal, Portugal, 22–24 January 2018; Volume 1, pp. 108–116.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356



===== PAGE 22 =====

Sensors 2026, 26, 356
22 of 22
20.
Tavallaee, M.; Bagheri, E.; Lu, W.; Ghorbani, A.A. A detailed analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set. In Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 8–10 July 2009;
IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2009; pp. 1–6.
21.
Diaf, A.; Korba, A.A.; Karabadji, N.E.; Ghamri-Doudane, Y. BARTPredict: Empowering IoT Security with LLM-Driven Cyber
Threat Prediction. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2501.01664.
22.
Neto, E.C.P.; Dadkhah, S.; Ferreira, R.; Zohourian, A.; Lu, R.; Ghorbani, A.A. CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark for
large-scale attacks in IoT environment. Sensors 2023, 23, 5941. [CrossRef]
23.
Adjewa, F.; Esseghir, M.; Merghem-Boulahia, L. Efficient federated intrusion detection in 5g ecosystem using optimized bert-
based model. In Proceedings of the 2024 20th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and
Communications (WiMob), Paris, France, 21–23 October 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 62–67.
24.
Zhang, J.; Bu, H.; Wen, H.; Liu, Y.; Fei, H.; Xi, R.; Li, L.; Yang, Y.; Zhu, H.; Meng, D. When LLMs meet cybersecurity: A systematic
literature review. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2405.03644. [CrossRef]
25.
Ferrag, M.A.; Battah, A.; Tihanyi, N.; Jain, R.; Maimu¸t, D.; Alwahedi, F.; Lestable, T.; Thandi, N.S.; Mechri, A.; Debbah, M.; et al.
SecureFalcon: Are we there yet in automated software vulnerability detection with LLMs? IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 2025, 51,
1248–1265. [CrossRef]
26.
Hang, C.N.; Yu, P.D.; Morabito, R.; Tan, C.W. Large language models meet next-generation networking technologies: A review.
Future Internet 2024, 16, 365. [CrossRef]
27.
Wang, M.; Yang, N.; Weng, N. Securing a smart home with a transformer-based IoT intrusion detection system. Electronics 2023,
12, 2100. [CrossRef]
28.
McDonald, D.; Papadopoulos, R.; Benningfield, L. Reducing llm hallucination using knowledge distillation: A case study with
mistral large and mmlu benchmark. Authorea 2024, preprints.
29.
Kök, ˙I.; Demirci, O.; Özdemir, S. When IoT Meet LLMs: Applications and Challenges.
In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (BigData), Washington, DC, USA, 15–18 December 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2024;
pp. 7075–7084.
30.
Yu, Z.; Wang, Z.; Li, Y.; Gao, R.; Zhou, X.; Bommu, S.R.; Zhao, Y.; Lin, Y. Edge-llm: Enabling efficient large language model
adaptation on edge devices via unified compression and adaptive layer voting. In Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design
Automation Conference, San Francisco CA USA, 23–27 June 2024; pp. 1–6.
31.
Zhao, W.; Jing, W.; Lu, Z.; Wen, X. Edge and terminal cooperation enabled llm deployment optimization in wireless network. In
Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC Workshops), Hangzhou, China,
7–9 August 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 220–225.
32.
Qu, G.; Chen, Q.; Wei, W.; Lin, Z.; Chen, X.; Huang, K. Mobile edge intelligence for large language models: A contemporary
survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2025, 27, 3820–3860. [CrossRef]
33.
Deshmukh, A.; de la Rosa, P.E.; Rodriguez, R.V.; Dasari, S. Enhancing Privacy in IoT-Enabled Digital Infrastructure: Evaluating
Federated Learning for Intrusion and Fraud Detection. Sensors 2025, 25, 3043. [CrossRef]
34.
Ferrag, M.A.; Friha, O.; Hamouda, D.; Maglaras, L.; Janicke, H. Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security
dataset of IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 40281–40306. [CrossRef]
35.
Kumar, A.; Murthy, S.V.; Singh, S.; Ragupathy, S. The ethics of interaction: Mitigating security threats in llms. arXiv 2024,
arXiv:2401.12273. [CrossRef]
36.
Gan, Y.; Yang, Y.; Ma, Z.; He, P.; Zeng, R.; Wang, Y.; Li, Q.; Zhou, C.; Li, S.; Wang, T.; et al. Navigating the risks: A survey of
security, privacy, and ethics threats in llm-based agents. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2411.09523. [CrossRef]
37.
Liu, Y.; Cong, T.; Zhao, Z.; Backes, M.; Shen, Y.; Zhang, Y. Robustness Over Time: Understanding Adversarial Examples’
Effectiveness on Longitudinal Versions of Large Language Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2308.07847. [CrossRef]
38.
Che, X.; Li, H.; Chi, L.; Wang, F.; Hu, J. Evaluation the Robustness of Iot Intrusion Detection Models in Adversarial Attack
Environments. SSRN 2023, 4611920. [CrossRef]
39.
Khaleel, T.A. Developing robust machine learning models to defend against adversarial attacks in the field of cybersecurity.
In Proceedings of the 2024 International Congress on Human-Computer Interaction, Optimization and Robotic Applications
(HORA), Istanbul, Turkiye, 23–25 May 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 1–7.
40.
Fan, X.; Tao, C. Towards resilient and efficient llms: A comparative study of efficiency, performance, and adversarial robustness.
arXiv 2024, arXiv:2408.04585. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356
