

===== PAGE 1 =====

Lightweight Intrusion Detection in IoT via
SHAP-Guided Feature Pruning and
Knowledge-Distilled Kronecker Networks
Hafsa BENADDI∗, Mohammed JOUHARI§, Nouha LAAMECH¶, Anas MOTII¶, Khalil IBRAHIMI§
∗LSIA Laboratory, Moroccan School of Engineering Sciences (EMSI), Tanger, Morocco
§ Laboratory of Research in Informatics (LaRI), Faculty of Sciences, Ibn Tofail University, Kenitra, Morocco
¶ College of Computing, University Mohammed VI Polytechnic, Benguerir, Morocco
Emails: h.benaddi@emsi.ma, {mohammed.jouhari1, khalil.ibrahimi}@uit.ac.ma, {nouha.laamech, anas.motii}@um6p.ma
Abstract—The widespread deployment of Internet of Things
(IoT) devices requires intrusion detection systems (IDS) with high
accuracy while operating under strict resource constraints. Con-
ventional deep learning IDS are often too large and computation-
ally intensive for edge deployment. We propose a lightweight IDS
that combines SHAP-guided feature pruning with knowledge-
distilled Kronecker networks. A high-capacity teacher model
identifies the most relevant features through SHAP explanations,
and a compressed student leverages Kronecker-structured layers
to minimize parameters while preserving discriminative inputs.
Knowledge distillation transfers softened decision boundaries
from teacher to student, improving generalization under com-
pression. Experiments on the TON IOT dataset show that the
student is nearly three orders of magnitude smaller than the
teacher yet sustains macro-F1 above 0.986 with millisecond-level
inference latency. The results demonstrate that explainability-
driven pruning and structured compression can jointly enable
scalable, low-latency, and energy-efficient IDS for heterogeneous
IoT environments.
Index Terms—Intrusion Detection System, Internet of Things
Security, SHAP Feature Selection, Knowledge Distillation, Kro-
necker Networks, Edge Computing
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT) has
transformed industrial, domestic, and public domains through
ubiquitous sensing and automation. This growth, however,
introduces new security vulnerabilities, as low-power IoT de-
vices typically operate under severe constraints on processing,
memory, and energy, and are often deployed in unattended
environments. Conventional security mechanisms relying on
complex models and frequent updates are unsuitable for such
conditions. Intrusion detection systems (IDS) remain a critical
line of defence, yet their deployment in IoT networks is
restricted by requirements for scalability across heterogeneous
devices, real-time responsiveness, and minimal energy con-
sumption without compromising accuracy [1].
Recent studies highlight that traditional and deep learning
IDS, when shifted from centralized high-performance servers
This work has been published in the proceedings of the 2025 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Communication Technologies and Networking
(CommNet).
to edge devices, suffer from excessive memory and compu-
tational demands. Such models cause high inference delays
and energy costs, making them impractical for battery-powered
nodes. This has motivated research into lightweight IDS archi-
tectures capable of balancing efficiency and accuracy [2]. Ap-
proaches based on model compression, including quantisation
and knowledge distillation, demonstrate that significant param-
eter reduction can be achieved while sustaining competitive
accuracy. Similarly, ensemble methods have improved robust-
ness and scalability in complex traffic scenarios [3]. However,
existing evaluations infrequently report deployment-oriented
metrics such as CPU load or device-level energy consumption
[4], leaving the interaction among latency, scalability, and
detection performance not sufficiently understood.
This paper addresses these challenges by proposing a
latency-sensitive and energy-efficient IDS framework tailored
to heterogeneous IoT environments. The design employs a
teacher–student paradigm in which a high-capacity teacher
model computes Shapley additive (SHAP) feature importances
to guide feature pruning, while a Kronecker-compressed stu-
dent network is trained via knowledge distillation to mimic
teacher decision boundaries with drastically fewer parameters.
By aligning model complexity with resource constraints, the
framework explicitly balances latency, accuracy, and energy
consumption. The system is evaluated on the public TON IOT
dataset, and experiments on representative hardware confirm
that the proposed student achieves substantial reductions in
model size and inference latency with minimal accuracy degra-
dation.To support reproducibility and comparative research,
the full implementation and dataset splits are released as open
source.
The main contributions are as follows:
• Identification of deployment challenges in IoT IDS, with
emphasis on trade-offs among scalability, latency, energy
efficiency, and accuracy [2].
• A hierarchical teacher–student IDS framework inte-
grating SHAP-guided feature pruning with Kronecker-
compressed layers for resource-adaptive operation.
• Comprehensive evaluation on the TON IOT dataset and
edge hardware, demonstrating that the student achieves
979-8-3315-5781-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
arXiv:2512.19488v1  [cs.LG]  22 Dec 2025



===== PAGE 2 =====

drastic compression and low-latency inference while pre-
serving high detection accuracy.
• An open-source implementation and benchmark dataset
splits to facilitate reproducibility and future comparative
studies1.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews prior work on lightweight IDS, explainable
pruning, knowledge distillation, and Kronecker factorization.
Section III introduces the proposed framework, Section IV
presents the experimental setup and results, Section V dis-
cusses implications and research directions, and Section VI
concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Research on intrusion detection for the IoT has progressed
across several complementary directions, including lightweight
model design, explainable feature selection, knowledge distil-
lation, and structured parameter reduction. Six representative
contributions from leading journals are highlighted here to
situate the present work.
Federated learning has been combined with explainable
feature aggregation, where local clients share SHAP-derived
importance profiles to a central server that constructs a global
model with high detection accuracy while maintaining pri-
vacy constraints [5]. Although effective, this approach omits
structured compression. Meta-heuristic optimisation has also
been employed to select features and hyperparameters, with
teaching–learning based optimisation reducing communication
overhead while sustaining detection rates against diverse attack
types [6]. Such optimisation, however, remains confined to
classical classifiers and does not support interpretability or
model transfer.
Deep learning-based IoT IDS have been made more trans-
parent by incorporating SHAP and LIME explanations. A one-
dimensional convolutional detector achieves near-perfect F1-
scores on the ToN-IoT dataset, while offering both global
and local interpretability [7]. Despite its transparency, the
model lacks compression or distillation mechanisms. Struc-
tured compression has been explored through Kronecker prod-
uct factorisation, where KronNet reduces parameter counts by
orders of magnitude and still delivers accuracy above 99%
on benchmark datasets [8]. This demonstrates the promise of
Kronecker-based designs, but without feature-guided pruning
or teacher–student transfer.
Knowledge distillation surveys underscore its potential for
deploying compact models on constrained devices, classifying
techniques by knowledge type, training strategy, and applica-
tion [9]. However, most studies focus on the vision and lan-
guage domains rather than intrusion detection. Finally, adap-
tive federated IDS frameworks have integrated Long Short-
Term Memory with joint strategy optimisation, dynamically
adjusting hyperparameters across heterogeneous clients while
maintaining privacy [10]. These systems achieve robustness
1https://github.com/mohammed-jouhari/iot-ids-lightweight
Data Preprocessing
Standardize numeric +
One-hot encode
categorical
SHAP
Feature Ranking &
Pruning
Feature ranking →
select top-K [SHAP]
Teacher Training
High-capacity model
on pruned features
Student
Optimization
Pruning + Kronecker
compression + INT8
quantization
Predictions 
 Near-teacher accuracy
under constraints
Deployment 
 Edge deployment: low
latency, low energy
Knowledge 
distillation 
Fig. 1.
Architectural overview of the proposed IDS: data preprocess-
ing, SHAP-based feature ranking and pruning, teacher training, Kronecker-
compressed student optimization with knowledge distillation, and final de-
ployment on resource-constrained IoT devices.
under non-stationary traffic, but do not incorporate explainable
feature pruning or structural compression.
The reviewed literature collectively advances federated de-
tection, meta-heuristic optimization, explainability, Kronecker
compression, and distillation, but each dimension has evolved
largely in isolation. The present work addresses this frag-
mentation by unifying SHAP-guided pruning with knowledge-
distilled Kronecker networks, resulting in an interpretable and
compact IDS suitable for heterogeneous IoT deployments.
III. PROPOSED MODEL
This work aims to design an intrusion detection system
(IDS) that preserves high detection accuracy while remaining
feasible for deployment on resource-constrained IoT devices.
To achieve this objective, we adopt a teacher–student frame-
work in which a high-capacity teacher model is trained on the
complete feature space and subsequently guides a compressed
student model. The proposed framework is depicted at two
levels: Fig. 1 provides a schematic overview of the system
architecture, while Algorithm 1 details the corresponding
training procedure.
A. Preprocessing and Teacher Network
As shown in the first block of Fig. 1, raw traffic flows un-
dergo preprocessing where numeric features are standardized
and categorical ones are one-hot encoded. This corresponds
to line 1 in Algorithm 1. Each flow is represented as x ∈Rd
with ground-truth label y ∈{0, 1}. After preprocessing, the
expanded input vector ex ∈Rp has p = 1,624 dimensions.
Lines 2–3 in Algorithm 1 correspond to the training of
the teacher model. The teacher is a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) with hidden layers of widths 512, 256, and 128,
each employing batch normalization, ReLU activation, and
dropout. Given ex, the teacher outputs logits z = f(ex) and



===== PAGE 3 =====

class probabilities p = softmax(z). The training minimizes
weighted cross-entropy:
LCE = −
C
X
c=1
wc 1[y = c] log pc,
(1)
where wc denotes the inverse class frequency. The teacher
is optimized with AdamW (learning rate 10−3, weight decay
10−3), cosine annealing scheduling, and early stopping with
patience of eight epochs. Although focal loss was considered,
weighted cross-entropy consistently produced the best results.
B. Feature Ranking and Pruning
The “SHAP Feature Ranking & Pruning” module in Fig. 1
corresponds to lines 3–4 in Algorithm 1. SHAP values provide
attribution scores per feature, averaged across samples to form
a global importance vector s ∈Rp. Features are ranked ac-
cordingly, and the top-K subset π1:K is retained. An ablation
analysis with K ∈{32, 64, 96, 128} showed that K = 32
preserved macro-F1 within 2% of the full model, making it
the adopted configuration for the student.
C. Kronecker-Compressed Student Network
Fig. 1 highlights “Student Optimization,” which corresponds
to line 5 in Algorithm 1. The student is constructed with
Kronecker factorized layers. Each linear transformation is
expressed as
y = x W⊤+ b,
W = A ⊗B,
(2)
where A ∈Ra1×a2 and B ∈Rb1×b2 with a1b1 = m and
a2b2 = n. The student processes the top-K features, pads
to a compatible dimension, and applies two Kronecker layers
separated by batch normalization and ReLU, followed by a
linear head. This design reduces the parameter count to 1,282,
compared with 998,274 in the teacher, making the student
model highly resource-efficient.
D. Knowledge Distillation
The “Knowledge Distillation” component in Fig. 1 is re-
alized in lines 6–9 of Algorithm 1. The student learns not
only from hard labels but also from the teacher’s softened
predictions. Let zs and zt denote the logits of the student and
teacher, respectively. The distillation loss is:
LKD = T 2 KL
 σ(zt/T) ∥σ(zs/T)

,
(3)
where σ is the softmax function and T is the temperature. The
total loss combines both sources of supervision:
Ltot = (1 −α)LCE + αLKD,
(4)
with α ∈[0, 1]. A grid search over T
∈{2, 3, 4} and
α ∈{0.5, 0.7, 0.9} identified the most effective settings by
maximizing validation macro-F1.
Algorithm 1 Training workflow of the proposed IDS frame-
work
Require: (Xtrain, ytrain), (Xval, yval), (Xtest, ytest)
1: Preprocess numeric and categorical features.
2: Train teacher with Eq. (1).
3: Compute SHAP attributions and rank features.
4: Select smallest K preserving macro-F1.
5: Build student with Kronecker layers on top-K features.
6: for T ∈{2, 3, 4}, α ∈{0.5, 0.7, 0.9} do
7:
Train student with (1 −α)LCE + αLKD.
8:
Validate macro-F1 and retain best (T, α).
9: end for
10: Optionally quantize and evaluate fp32/int8 variants.
E. Deployment Considerations
The final block of Fig. 1 emphasizes deployment, corre-
sponding to line 10 in Algorithm 1. After training and distil-
lation, the student is optionally quantized to INT8 precision,
further reducing memory and computational cost. With only
1,282 parameters, the student model is lightweight enough
for microcontrollers and edge gateways. This compact design
ensures low-latency inference and reduced energy consump-
tion, while maintaining detection accuracy comparable to the
teacher. These characteristics directly address the constraints
of real-world IoT scenarios where continuous monitoring must
operate under strict device limitations.
In summary, the framework follows a coherent pipeline: raw
traffic is standardized and encoded, a high-capacity teacher is
trained, SHAP-based ranking identifies the most informative
attributes, and a Kronecker-compressed student is distilled to
approximate the teacher’s decision boundary. The integration
of pruning, structured compression, and knowledge distillation
ensures that the resulting model achieves near-teacher accuracy
while remaining lightweight enough for on-device inference.
When coupled with post-training quantization, this design
results in an IDS that balances detection reliability with
latency and energy efficiency, making it particularly suited for
deployment in resource-constrained IoT environments.
Having established the design of the teacher–student IDS
and its deployment-oriented optimizations, we now turn to
the empirical assessment of its effectiveness. The following
section details the experimental setup, including dataset parti-
tioning, training protocols, and hyperparameter configurations,
and evaluates the proposed framework in terms of detection
accuracy, latency, throughput, and memory efficiency. This
evaluation provides a quantitative basis for judging whether
the architectural choices outlined above translate into tangible
benefits under realistic IoT constraints.
IV. EVALUATION
This section evaluates the proposed SHAP-guided pruning
and Kronecker-based distillation framework under realistic IoT
intrusion detection scenarios. The analysis focuses on both
algorithmic accuracy and deployment-oriented metrics, with
particular attention to runtime efficiency, parameter reduction,



===== PAGE 4 =====

TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS USED IN TRAINING TEACHER AND STUDENT
MODELS.
Parameter
Value
Batch size
1024
Learning rate
0.001
Weight decay
0.001
Epochs
50
Patience
8
Dropout
0.3
Scheduler
Cosine
Step size
10
Gamma
0.5
and robustness under imbalanced traffic distributions. We
first describe the training setup and dataset profiling before
reporting experimental results.
A. Model Training Setup
All experiments were conducted in a Google Colab en-
vironment with GPU acceleration and a PyTorch runtime.
The TON IOT dataset was preprocessed using the same
ColumnTransformer pipeline described in Section IV-B, where
numerical features were standardized and categorical attributes
one-hot encoded. To avoid source leakage, a source-aware
split was applied whenever device or subnet identifiers were
available; otherwise stratified random partitioning preserved
class ratios. The final distribution allocated 70% of data to
training, 15% to validation, and 15% to testing, ensuring that
evaluation measured cross-source generalization rather than
memorization.
The hyperparameters are summarized in Table I. Both
teacher and student models were trained with a batch size
of 1024 using AdamW (learning rate 10−3, weight decay
10−3). A cosine learning rate scheduler with step size 10 and
decay factor γ = 0.5 stabilized convergence under non-IID
traffic. Dropout with rate 0.3 was applied, and early stopping
with patience of 8 epochs prevented overfitting. Weighted
cross-entropy was adopted as the primary loss. SHAP-guided
feature pruning was always applied before Kronecker-based
knowledge distillation to ensure reproducibility. Exported ar-
tifacts include preprocessing maps, class distributions, and
convergence curves for auditability.
B. Dataset Profiling and Preprocessing
The TON IOT dataset was generated in a cyber-range
integrating edge, fog, and cloud via SDN/NFV orchestration,
capturing heterogeneous behaviors across IoT, IIoT, and host
systems [11], [12]. Its network split contains 21.98 million
flow records with 42 features and nine attack categories,
including scanning, DoS, DDoS, ransomware, backdoor, in-
jection, Cross-site Scripting, password cracking, and Man-in-
the-Middle [13]. Preprocessing combined a StandardScaler for
numeric features and a OneHotEncoder for categorical ones,
yielding an expanded input space whose dimensionality and
mapping were exported. Partitioning preserved empirical label
distributions while minimizing leakage.
normal
23.7% (50000)
backdoor
9.5% (20000)
ddos
9.5% (20000)
dos
9.5% (20000)
injection
9.5% (20000)
password
9.5% (20000)
scanning
9.5% (20000)
ransomware
9.5% (20000)
xss
9.5% (20000)
Other
0.5% (1043)
N=211043
Fig. 2. Relative frequencies of attack categories in TON IOT network data
(donut view with total sample size at center).
Figure 2 shows the distribution of attack categories. Vol-
umetric attacks such as DoS and DDoS dominate, while
categories such as injection, cross-site scripting, and Man-in-
the-Middle are rare, resulting in a heavy-tail imbalance. From
a deployment point of view, this imbalance may degrade the
recall of minority classes under distribution changes. Mitiga-
tion in our workflow includes stratified batching, class-aware
metrics, and SHAP-guided pruning combined with knowledge
distillation to preserve decision margins for rare attacks under
constrained inference.
The correlation analysis of high-variance numeric fea-
tures further reveals redundancy. As shown in Fig. 3, traffic
volume attributes (src_bytes, dst_bytes, src_pkts,
dst_pkts) exhibit strong dependencies, whereas protocol-
level indicators remain weakly correlated. This confirms that
SHAP-based feature pruning can remove collinear attributes
with little information loss, reducing latency and memory
footprint without compromising detection of rare attacks.
C. Experimental Results
The evaluation integrates explainability-driven feature se-
lection, confusion structure, and runtime benchmarks to assess
the student architecture.
As shown in Fig. 4, SHAP highlights the traffic volume
and connection state attributes as dominant. Moreover, Fig. 5
indicates that K = 128 recovers nearly all importance mass.
This justifies pruning as a latency-aware strategy, although
stability under non-IID traffic and noise remains an open
consideration.
Fig. 6 shows that both fp32 and int8 variants achieve iden-
tical recall with no false negatives. Specificity reaches 0.9966
and precision 0.9497 for fp32, with minor improvements for
int8. Reported accuracy (≈0.997) and macro-F1 (≈0.987)
confirm that quantization preserves performance. Errors con-
centrate in false positives on benign flows, suggesting the need
for calibration to mitigate alert fatigue in deployment.



===== PAGE 5 =====

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF TEACHER AND STUDENT MODELS IN TERMS OF ACCURACY, MACRO-F1, LATENCY, AND COMPRESSION.
Model
Accuracy
Macro-F1
Params
Size (KB)
Mean Lat. (ms)
p95 Lat. (ms)
Speedup
Compression
Teacher (fp32)
0.9989
0.9955
769,922
3021.53
–
–
–
–
Student (fp32)
0.9968
0.9863
3,042
22.29
1.29
1.62
1.00
1.00
Student (int8)
0.9969
0.9867
3,042
22.44
1.45
2.25
0.89
0.99
src_bytes
dst_bytes
missed_bytes
http_respons
e_body_len
dst_ip_bytes
src_ip_bytes
src_port
dst_port
dns_qclass
duration
dst_pkts
src_pkts
dns_qtype
http_request
_body_len
http_status_
code
dns_rcode
src_bytes
dst_bytes
missed_bytes
http_response_body_l
en
dst_ip_bytes
src_ip_bytes
src_port
dst_port
dns_qclass
duration
dst_pkts
src_pkts
dns_qtype
http_request_body_le
n
http_status_code
dns_rcode
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pearson r
Fig. 3.
Correlation among top-variance numeric features in the TON IOT
dataset.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Mean |SHAP|
dns_AA_-
dns_rejected_-
dst_ip_103.38.120.36
dns_RD_-
service_smb;gssapi
service_dns
proto_tcp
conn_state_SF
conn_state_S1
dns_RA_F
src_port
dns_rejected_F
src_bytes
dns_rejected_T
dst_ip_192.168.1.193
service_ssl
dns_rcode
dst_ip_192.168.1.1
proto_udp
dst_ip_192.168.1.184
conn_state_RSTR
service_-
type_backdoor
dst_ip_bytes
service_smb
conn_state_S3
src_pkts
type_ddos
src_ip_bytes
dst_bytes
Fig. 4. Global ranking of discriminative features via mean absolute SHAP.
Table II confirms that the student reduces parameters by
nearly 1/250 while maintaining macro-F1 above 0.986. Both
variants preserve perfect recall on attacks, with all residual
errors as false positives. The fp32 student achieves mean
latency of 1.29 ms and p95 latency of 1.62 ms, enabling real-
time inference. The int8 version slightly increases latency but
offers additional storage efficiency.
Finally, Fig. 7 illustrates runtime benefits. Throughput in-
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Top-K features
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative share of total importance
Cumulative share
K=128
Fig. 5. Cumulative attribution curve, with cutoff K = 128 recovering nearly
the full importance mass.
(a) Student fp32.
(b) Student int8.
Fig. 6.
Confusion matrices of the distilled student under fp32 and int8
precision.
creases by ∼6.5× (from 3.68×104 to 2.39×105 samples/s),
while mean latency falls from 1963 ms for the teacher to
303 ms for the student. The narrow gap between mean and
tail latency indicates stable inference, which is crucial for
jitter-sensitive IoT traffic. Nevertheless, the evaluation does
not account for heterogeneous deployment conditions, where
device-level energy budgets, workload bursts, and non-IID
traffic may influence runtime consistency.
V. DISCUSSION AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The near-perfect accuracy achieved by the student model,
even after source-aware partitioning and strict preprocessing,
indicates that the limitation lies less in the training pipeline
than in the dataset structure itself. In the TON IOT traces, at-
tack signatures remain highly separable, enabling both teacher
and distilled student networks to approximate full memoriza-
tion. Similar outcomes have been reported in earlier studies,
where decision trees or random forests reached comparably
high scores on the same benchmark [13], [14].
From a deployment perspective, such results warrant cau-
tion. The pipeline prevents leakage, yet the dataset’s restricted
adversarial diversity and absence of temporal drift likely inflate



===== PAGE 6 =====

Teacher
Student
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Throughput (samples/sec)
36810
238656
(a) Throughput over the validation set, in samples/s.
Teacher mean
Teacher p95
Student mean
Student p95
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Latency per full pass (ms)
1963
2605
303
310
(b) Latency per validation pass with batch size 1024,
showing mean and p95.
Fig. 7. Runtime comparison between teacher and student models. Panel (a)
highlights throughput gains, while panel (b) details latency reductions.
accuracy and fail to capture the variability of real traffic.
As highlighted in prior work, evolving attack morphologies
and non-IID flows typically reduce detection performance
in practice [11], [12]. Evaluations on idealized corpora may
therefore obscure vulnerabilities that emerge in operational IoT
scenarios with heterogeneous devices and energy-constrained
inference.
Future research should address these gaps through more
challenging evaluation protocols. Cross-dataset validation, for
instance, could reveal generalization limits by training on
TON IOT and testing on X-IIoT-ID or CIC-IDS2021. Ro-
bustness may further be examined via controlled label noise,
adversarial perturbations, or synthetic datasets that emulate
temporal drift. Another open question concerns deployment-
level trade-offs: the effect of varying compression ratios on
energy–accuracy balance, and the resilience of distilled Kro-
necker networks to unseen attack variants in federated or
highly resource-limited environments. Tackling these ques-
tions would move IDS research closer to trustworthy operation
in next-generation IoT networks.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work presented a lightweight intrusion detection frame-
work for IoT that integrates SHAP-guided feature pruning
with knowledge-distilled Kronecker networks, demonstrating
that feature-aware pruning and structured compression can
drastically reduce model parameters, memory footprint, and
inference latency while retaining essential detection capabil-
ities. Experiments confirmed that the student model achieves
millisecond-level inference and a footprint below one per-
cent of the teacher, supporting feasibility for deployment
in constrained edge devices. However, the results also re-
vealed reduced macro-F1, emphasizing the need for more
effective strategies to handle imbalanced traffic and rare at-
tack categories, as well as a deeper understanding of the
interaction between pruning depth, distillation temperature,
and Kronecker rank in heterogeneous environments. Future
directions include adaptive pruning strategies, workload-aware
scheduling, privacy-preserving distillation for federated IoT,
and cross-dataset stress testing, all aiming to narrow the
energy–accuracy gap while ensuring scalability, robustness,
and transparency in real-world IoT scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Serhane, K. Ibrahimi, E.-M. Hamzaoui, M. Jouhari, and J. Ben-
Othman, “IoT Intrusion Detection Using Machine Learning Classifiers
and PCA Dimensionality Reduction for N-BaIoT Dataset,” in ICC 2025
- IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2025, pp. 5809–
5814.
[2] H. Benaddi, M. Jouhari, and O. Elharrouss, “A lightweight hybrid
approach for intrusion detection systems using a chi-square feature
selection approach in IoT,” Internet of Things, vol. 32, p. 101624, 2025.
[3] M. A. Akif, I. Butun, A. Williams, and I. Mahgoub, “Hybrid Machine
Learning Models for Intrusion Detection in IoT: Leveraging a Real-
World IoT Dataset,” 2025.
[4] M. Jouhari, H. Benaddi, and K. Ibrahimi, “Efficient Intrusion Detection:
Combining X2 Feature Selection with CNN-BiLSTM on the UNSW-
NB15 Dataset,” in 2024 11th International Conference on Wireless
Networks and Mobile Communications (WINCOM), 2024, pp. 1–6.
[5] A. H. Md. S. Saif, and S. I. Md. “A novel federated learning approach
for IoT botnet intrusion detection using SHAP-based knowledge distil-
lation,” Complex & Intelligent Systems, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2025.
[6] A. Kaushik and H. Al-Raweshidy, “A novel intrusion detection system
for internet of things devices and data,” Wireless Networks, vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 285–294, 2023.
[7] F. Ebrahimi, R. Javidan, R. Akbari, and Y. Hosseini, “Intrusion detection
in the internet of things using convolutional neural networks: an explain-
able AI approach,” Cybersecurity, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 66, Sep. 2025.
[8] S. Ullah, J. Wu, M. M. Kamal, A. K. J. Saudagar et al., “KronNet:
A Lightweight Kronecker Enhanced Feed-Forward Neural Network for
Efficient IoT Intrusion Detection,” Scientific Reports, vol. 15, no. 20850,
2025.
[9] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge Distillation: A
Survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, no. 6, pp.
1789–1819, 2021.
[10] S. E. Sorour, M. Aljaafari, A. M. Shaker, and A. E. Amin, “LSTM-
JSO framework for privacy preserving adaptive intrusion detection in
federated IoT networks,” Scientific Reports, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 11321,
2025.
[11] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
security systems at the edge: Network TON IoT datasets,” Sustainable
Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 102994, 2021.
[12] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T.
H. d. Hartog, “ToN IoT: The Role of Heterogeneity and the Need for
Standardization of Features and Attack Types in IoT Network Intrusion
Data Sets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496,
2022.
[13] I. Tareq, B. M. Elbagoury, S. El-Regaily, and E.-S. M. El-Horbaty,
“Analysis of ToN-IoT, UNW-NB15, and Edge-IIoT Datasets Using DL
in Cybersecurity for IoT,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 19, 2022.
[14] S. Roy, J. Li, B.-J. Choi, and Y. Bai, “A lightweight supervised intrusion
detection mechanism for IoT networks,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 127, no. C, p. 276–285, Feb. 2022.
