

===== PAGE 1 =====

Radical-induced Hetero-Nuclear Mixing and Low-ﬁeld 13C Relaxation in Solid Pyruvic Acid
Hana Kouˇrilov´a,1, ∗Michael Jurkutat,1, † David Peat,2 Karel Kouˇril,1 Alixander S. Khan,2
Anthony J. Horsewill,2 James F. MacDonald,2 John Owers-Bradley,2 and Benno Meier1, 3, ‡
1Institute of Biological Interfaces 4, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK
3Institute of Physical Chemistry, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
(Dated: August 2, 2022)
Radicals serve as source in dynamic nuclear polarization, but may also act as polarization sink.
If the coupling between the electron spins and diﬀerent nuclear reservoirs is stronger than any of
the reservoirs’ couplings to the lattice, radicals can mediate hetero-nuclear mixing. Here, we report
radical-enhanced 13C relaxation in pyruvic acid doped with trityl. We ﬁnd a linear dependence of
the carbon T1 on ﬁeld between 5 mT and 2 T. We extend a model, employed previously for protons,
to carbon, and predict eﬃcient proton-carbon mixing via the radical Non-Zeeman reservoir, for ﬁelds
from 20 mT to beyond 1 T. Discrepancies between the observed carbon relaxation and the model
are attributed to enhanced direct hetero-nuclear mixing due to trityl-induced linebroadening, and
a ﬁeld-dependent carbon diﬀusion from the radical vicinity to the bulk. Measurements of hetero-
nuclear polarization transfer up to 600 mT conﬁrm the predicted mixing as well as both eﬀects
inferred from the relaxation analysis.
ARTICLE
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic res-
onance imaging (MRI) are powerful tools in various ﬁelds
of science and industry, but their versatility is limited by
the weak nuclear polarization. The low sensitivity may be
alleviated by dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP), where
the large polarization of electron spins is transferred to
nuclear spins. In dissolution-DNP,1 this process is car-
ried out at temperatures near 1 K and ﬁelds of several
Tesla. Under these conditions, the electron spins are al-
most fully polarized, and it is possible to achieve near
unity polarization also for nuclear spins. The hyperpolar-
ized sample is then dissolved with a jet of hot solvent, and
the solution is used for sensitized NMR spectroscopy2–4
or imaging5–8.
In bullet-DNP, the order of dissolution and transfer is
reversed.9,10 Here, the solid sample is transferred rapidly
to the second magnet, and dissolved only near the NMR
tube. This procedure limits dilution, avoids the use of
hot solvents, and may be beneﬁcial for hyperpolarization
of moieties with a short T1 in the liquid state.
During the bullet transfer at low ﬁeld (currently about
70 mT) the radical spin that is needed as source for DNP,
however, may act as polarization sink. The extent of this
eﬀect was previously diﬃcult to estimate, since the low-
ﬁeld low-temperature relaxation in presence of radicals
has not been studied comprehensively. A previous study
at low temperature in pyruvic acid doped with trityl be-
tween 0.9 and 9 T found a cubic ﬁeld-dependence of the
carbon T1.11 If this trend were to continue to lower ﬁelds,
it would be detrimental for bullet-DNP.
We have recently reported the low-temperature low-
ﬁeld 1H relaxation in pyruvic acid doped with trityl,
where we showed that a ﬁrst-principle based formalism
by Wenckebach can describe the eﬀect of trityl quanti-
tatively over two orders of magnitude in ﬁeld. Here, we
present the corresponding 13C relaxation measurements
as well as thermal mixing data in non-degassed neat 1-
13C pyruvic acid (neat PA, ◦) and 1-13C pyruvic acid
doped with 15 mM OX063 (doped PA, •) for ﬁelds up
to 2 T. The measurements were performed using a fast
ﬁeld cycling (FFC) setup previously described12,13, ex-
perimental details are given in the Supplement.
Fig. 1(a) shows the ﬁeld-dependence of the carbon re-
laxation time T •
1,C for doped PA for temperatures be-
tween 4.2 K and 40 K. At low ﬁelds, we ﬁnd an approx-
imately linear increase of T •
1,C with ﬁeld. This low-ﬁeld
linearity holds up to 40 K, although T •
1,C expectedly de-
creases with increasing temperature.
Also shown in Fig. 1(a) are data at 1.8 K recorded by
Niedbalski, Lumata and co-workers11. They found that
their data are well described by a power law T1 = CBα,
with an exponent of α = 3.1, indicated by the dashed
gray line. While we observe a linear rather than a cu-
bic ﬁeld dependence at lower ﬁelds, our data at 4.2 K are
nonetheless in good agreement with the data by Niedbal-
ski et al. at 1.8 K.
The steep increase in 13C T •
1,C, as observed by Niedbal-
ski et al. at 1.8 K, may be attributed to the substantial
electron spin polarization P0 with increasing ﬁeld, which
leads to a suppression of triple-spin ﬂips. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), a corresponding correction of the observed lin-
ear dependence (dotted gray line) gives a satisfactory de-
scription over more than four orders of magnitude in T1.
To assess the eﬀect of trityl radicals on nuclear relax-
ation, it is requisite to compare the relaxation of both
1H and 13C nuclear spins in the presence of trityl to that
in neat PA. Relaxation rates R1 = 1/T1 of both nuclei,
recorded at 4.2 K, are shown for neat and doped PA in
Figure 1(b).
We note for neat PA that the rates R◦
1 of protons and
carbons converge at low ﬁeld, which is expected based on
reports of direct low-ﬁeld thermal mixing in neat PA13,15.
This direct exchange is negligible for B > 10 mT but
becomes relevant as the ﬁeld approaches zero.
arXiv:2202.05688v2  [physics.chem-ph]  1 Aug 2022



===== PAGE 2 =====

2
R
(a)
(b)
∝B1
∝B-1
Figure 1. Field-dependent relaxation in 1-13C PA doped with
15 mM trityl (OX063).
(a) 13C relaxation times for diﬀer-
ent temperatures together with 1.8 K data (gray) reproduced
from Ref.11. The dashed gray line corresponds to a power law
with an exponent α = 3.1 as reported by Niedbalski et al.
based on measurements at 1.8 K and ﬁelds from 0.9 to 9 T.
The dotted gray line is computed using T1 = cB/(1 −P 2
0 ),
where c = 50 s/T, and P0 = tanh(ℏγSB/(2kBT)) is the elec-
tron spin polarization. (b) The 4.2 K data on doped PA (solid
symbols) plotted as rates together with 1H data. For compar-
ison the relaxation rates measured on neat PA (open symbols)
are shown as well. The presence of OX063 increases the relax-
ation rate of carbons throughout the observed ﬁeld range, and
causes faster proton relaxation up to approximately 200 mT.
Also shown are EPR relaxation data reported by Lumata et
al.14 near 4.2 K.
The presence of trityl signiﬁcantly accelerates the re-
laxation of carbon over the entire ﬁeld range, while the
eﬀect on proton relaxation is only observable for ﬁelds
below 200 mT.
In addition to the nuclear relaxation rates, Fig. 1(b)
also shows electron spin-lattice relaxation rates reported
by Lumata et al.14 for temperatures near 4.2 K. For our
analysis below, we note that R1,S(T = 4K) ≈5 s−1 is
nearly independent of ﬁeld, which is expected since trityl
relaxes predominantly via oxygen.16
We have recently shown that the proton relaxation
can be described quantitatively17 using a thermodynamic
spin temperature model.18–20 In this model, as indicated
in the sketch in Fig. 2, the diﬀerent nuclear spin species
and radical electron spins are described as reservoirs with
distinct inverse temperatures βi = ℏ/(kBTi) that cou-
ple to one another and the lattice.
In particular, we
showed that the relaxation of proton spins is described
by their coupling to the electron Non-Zeeman (NZ) or
dipolar reservoir. This exchange is via energy-conserving
triple-spin ﬂips (TSFs), in which a nuclear spin ﬂip and
an electron-electron ﬂip-ﬂop occur simultaneously.21 The
TSF rate was calculated from ﬁrst principles,22,23 after
determining the NZ heat capacity from proton relaxation
data. This lead to a nearly quantitative agreement be-
tween the model and the measured proton relaxation
rates over two orders of magnitude in magnetic ﬁeld.17
Note that in this previous analysis of the proton re-
laxation, the carbon reservoir could be ignored, as its
heat capacity CC is about 64 times smaller than that of
the proton reservoir CH for pyruvic acid at any ﬁeld, as
shown in Fig. 2 (a). We now extend the analysis to the
carbon reservoir, which is coupled to the lattice with the
rate T ◦
1,C
−1 measured in neat PA and to the NZ reservoir
with the TSF rate τ −1
NZ−C. The latter is calculated17 and
compared to the TSF rate for protons in Fig. 2 (b). The
ﬁeld-dependence of the carbon TSF rate is shifted rela-
tive to that of protons by a factor of γH/γC = 4 and its
amplitude is two orders of magnitude smaller.
Details on the extension of the previous analysis17 to
three reservoirs and its numerical solution can be found in
the Supplement. The relaxation of three coupled reser-
voirs to the lattice temperature is generally given by a
tri-exponential decay. Since the experimental data do not
warrant an extraction of three coeﬃcients and three de-
cay rates, we compare the experimental data in Fig. 2 (c)
with eﬀective relaxation rates Ri,comb(t) = −˙βi(t)/βi(t),
evaluated at the time of measurement t = T •
1,i(B0). De-
tails are givene in the Supplement.
As expected, the presence of the carbon reservoir does
not aﬀect the resulting proton relaxation (solid green line
in Fig. 2 (c)), i.e., the three-reservoir description traces
the proton data for doped PA (full squares) as well as the
previous analysis,17 which had considered only protons
and the NZ reservoir.
The solution for the expected carbon rate (solid or-
ange line in Fig. 2 (c)), however, does not describe the
measured carbon rates well. At ﬁelds up to 20 mT, the
predicted relaxation rates are smaller than the ones ob-
served in experiment. For ﬁelds above 50 mT, the pre-
dicted relaxation rates are larger than the ones observed
in experiment.
The discrepancy at low ﬁelds may be attributed to di-
rect thermal mixing between the 1H and 13C reservoirs.
The rate for this process, denoted by τ −1
H−C in Fig. 2(b), is
negligible above 20 mT but becomes signiﬁcant at lower
ﬁelds.13 Note that this direct mixing process causes the
convergence, noted above, of the experimental carbon
and proton relaxation rates at low ﬁelds in neat PA.
Therefore, in neat PA below 20 mT, τ −1
H−C should corre-
spond to the experimentally observed carbon relaxation
rate. We ﬁnd that the low-ﬁeld relaxation rates of 13C in
doped PA are well described by 5 · T ◦
1,C
−1, i.e. the direct
proton-carbon relaxation rates scale with the neat rates,
but are accelerated ﬁve-fold. We attribute this increase
to line-broadening due to the presence of trityl in doped



===== PAGE 3 =====

3
H
predicted
τC-C
-1
bulk
core
3
4
τNZ-H
-1
TH
-1
○
TS
-1
τNZ-C
-1
TC
-1
○
τH-C
-1
predicted
Figure 2.
top: Carbon relaxation is described by three
reservoirs coupled to the lattice and each other.
(heat ca-
pacity for 1-13C PA at 200 mT as vertical axis) (a) Heat ca-
pacities of nuclear Zeeman reservoirs grow quadratically with
ﬁeld, while the NZ heat capacity is ﬁeld-independent. (b) Ex-
change rates used for modelling of nuclear relaxation rates.
The TSF rates τ −1
NZ−H/C have previously been calculated17
and the electron T −1
1,S is deduced from literature data14. Also
shown are the deduced carbon core-bulk diﬀusion rate τ −1
C−C
and the proton-carbon mixing rate τ −1
H−C. (c) The resulting
coeﬃcient-weighted relaxation rates for protons RH,comb(t =
T •
1,H) describe 1H data well17. The predicted rate for carbon
RC,comb(t = T •
1,C) is slower than experimental rates T •
1,C
−1
for ﬁelds up to 30 mT and faster above. Between 0.1 and 1 T
the high TSF rates for both nuclei cause the predicted rate
for carbon to be tied to the proton relaxation. Taking into ac-
count faster low-ﬁeld mixing with protons and carbon-carbon
spin-diﬀusion, the 13C data are well described (dash-dot line).
PA.
The discrepancy observed at ﬁelds above 50 mT may
be attributed to carbon spin diﬀusion.
In the model,
the protons are in the fast thermal mixing limit in this
ﬁeld range, i.e., the NZ reservoir exchanges faster with
the protons than with the lattice (τ −1
NZ−H ≫T −1
1,S) and
the NZ heat capacity does not aﬀect the proton reservoir
relevantly (CNZ ≪CH). Therefore the proton reservoir
sets the temperature of the Non-Zeeman reservoir. As
the ﬁeld is increased, the carbon reservoir increasingly
couples to the NZ reservoir, and so the model predicts
the same spin temperatures and hence relaxation rates
for both protons and carbons.
However, only a minute portion of nuclear spins in the
radical vicinity, referred to as core spins, are in direct ex-
change with the electron NZ reservoir. Carbon spins in
the bulk only exchange the radicals indirectly via carbon
spin diﬀusion. From our experiments we cannot distin-
guish whether a slow exchange between core and bulk
carbon spins impedes the relaxation, or if the diﬀusion
through the bulk is ﬁeld-dependent, and we discuss both
possibilities below
As detailed in the Supplement and indicated in the
sketch in Fig. 2, the relaxation model may be extended
with a second carbon reservoir and a ﬁeld-dependent car-
bon core-bulk time constant of 33 s/T. This leads to a
satisfactory description (dash-dot line in Fig. 2 (c)) of
the experimental data.
So altogether, the model, that describes low-ﬁeld pro-
ton relaxation in trityl-doped PA by exchange with the
radical NZ reservoir17, can be expanded to account for
the 13C relaxation. The model predicts eﬃcient proton-
carbon coupling mediated by the NZ reservoir above
20 mT, and our analysis indicates additionally (i) a ﬁve-
fold accelerated direct hetero-nuclear exchange at low
ﬁeld, and (ii) that the indirect hetero-nuclear coupling
is slowed by a ﬁeld-dependent carbon diﬀusion.
We now show that model’s prediction as well as the
modiﬁcations (i,ii) are consistent with the low-ﬁeld ther-
mal mixing (TM) experiments, which are displayed in
Fig. 3. In these experiments the carbon spins are satu-
rated while the proton polarization is allowed to achieve
thermal equilibrium at 2 T. The ﬁeld is then ramped to
the mixing ﬁeld for the duration of the mixing delay. Sub-
sequently the ﬁeld is ramped back to 2 T, where the 13C
spin polarization is read out. Further details are given in
the Supplement.
In order to quantify the eﬀectiveness of the thermal
mixing step we deﬁne the thermal mixing eﬃciency η as
the observed signal divided by the thermal equilibrium
signal of 13C at 2 T. We can neglect the heat load of the
carbon reservoir on the protons, so a thermal mixing eﬃ-
ciency of 100% then implies that the carbon spins attain
the spin temperature of the proton spins without any
losses, which corresponds to the theoretical maximum
attainable in absence of any relaxation.
The dependences of TM eﬃciency on mixing delay at
diﬀerent ﬁelds measured in neat and doped PA at 4.2 K



===== PAGE 4 =====

4
0.0 0.1
1
10
100
1000
10
100
η max [%]
 equilibrium
0.0 0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.01
0.1
1
10
tmax [s]
B [mT]
I
II III
IV
 neat      
3·T1C
•
   T1H
•
τNZ-C· CC
CNZ
 doped
0.1
1
10
100
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.01
0.1
1
10
0.01
0.1
1
10
Magnetic Field  (mT)
10
100
(a) Neat Pyruvic Acid
(b) Pyruvic Acid + 15 mM OX063
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
η (13C)
0
(c)
(d)
Figure 3. Thermal mixing in (a) neat and (b) doped PA at 4.2 K for ﬁelds from zero up to 200 mT and 600 mT, respectively.
All data were normalized to the thermal equilibrium 13C signal at 4.2 K and 2 T (see supporting information), with the scale
indicated for the respective zero-ﬁeld data (lower left). TM eﬃciency is shown as a function of mixing delay. Also the measured
13C T1 are indicated, where available, by white squares in the respective datasets. (c) The ﬁeld-dependent maximum mixing
eﬃciency ηmax shows that trityl mediates hetero-nuclear mixing above 5 mT, since ηmax is above equilibrium polarization
throughout the investigated ﬁeld range. (d) The corresponding times for TM maxima, tmax, show that trityl accelerates TM
below 20 mT. Above 20 mT tmax(B) for doped PA conﬁrms TM, tmax ≪3 · T •
1,C(orange dash-dot line). Also, for B ≥20mT
we ﬁnd tmax grows with ﬁeld, consistent with TM slowed down by diﬀusion. Beyond 200 mT the mixing process becomes
slower than the proton relaxation, tmax > T1,H (green dashed line), such that ηmax in (c) only slightly above equilibrium can
be achieved by TM for 400 and 600 mT.
are shown in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 3, respectively.
In Fig. 3 (c) and (d) the ﬁeld-dependent maximum TM
eﬃciency ηmax and corresponding mixing time tmax are
shown, respectively.
For neat PA we ﬁnd thermal mixing is most eﬃcient
well below 10 mT, in agreement with a previous study13,
and the converging T ◦
1 s for protons and carbons pointed
out above.
We note, however, a limited polarization
transfer to carbon in neat PA at ﬁelds up to 100 mT, cf.
Fig. 3 (c), corresponding to η ≈15 %, which has similarly
been observed in previous FFC experiments13. We infer
that this transfer occurs during the ﬁeld ramp up to the
resonance ﬁeld, and it may be associated with the pres-
ence of oxygen in the sample or exchange with quantized
rotational states of the methyl group.
For doped PA we observe, as predicted, eﬃcient ther-
mal mixing also for ﬁelds above 20 mT. For all ﬁelds val-
ues of ηmax greater than or equal to equilibrium polar-
ization are achieved, cf. Fig. 3 (c). And these transfer ef-
ﬁciency maxima are established at shorter mixing times
than the measured spin-lattice relaxation could account
for, i.e. tmax < 3·T •
1,c (orange dash-dot line in Fig. 3 (d)).
At low ﬁeld up to 5 mT we ﬁnd TM maxima simi-
lar to those in the neat sample, although η decreases
faster for longer mixing delays at low ﬁeld, which is due
to the radical-enhanced relaxation in the doped sample.
The shorter times tmax to reach the mixing maxima in
doped PA are consistent with (i) the ﬁve-fold faster direct
proton-carbon mixing inferred in the relaxation analysis.
Above 10 mT the direct proton-carbon exchange di-
minishes, while according to the relaxation analysis indi-
rect exchange via the NZ reservoir increases. Here, the
increasing tmax with ﬁeld is consistent with (ii) the slow-
ing of this process by a ﬁeld-dependent core-bulk diﬀu-
sion.
Beyond 200 mT the indirect proton-carbon mixing be-
comes slower than the proton relaxation, tmax > T •
1,H
(green dashed line in Fig. 3 (d)), such that no pronounced
maxima at 400 and 600 mT are observable, but rather
ηmax values slightly above thermal equilibrium.
The TM data are qualitatively consistent with the re-
sults from the model used to describe the carbon relax-
ation. They show that the presence of trityl causes the
predicted (indirect) mixing for ﬁelds above 20 mT. Addi-
tionally they indicate (i) trityl accelerates (direct) mix-
ing at low ﬁeld, and (ii) that the (indirect) mixing above
20 mT slows down with increasing ﬁeld.
In conclusion, the relaxation data reported here ex-
plain the success of our bullet-DNP experiments9,10. Ear-
lier work at ﬁelds above 1 T indicated a scaling of 13C re-
laxation rates with ﬁeld according to T1 ∼B3,11 and,
consequently, very fast relaxation at low ﬁelds.
Con-
versely, our data show that below 1 T the relaxation times
scale only linearly with the applied ﬁeld.
The extension of the model, that successfully describes
proton relaxation, to the carbon spins predicts indirect



===== PAGE 5 =====

5
proton-carbon exchange mediated by the NZ reservoir.
Qualitatively, this is consistent with the observed en-
hanced carbon relaxation as well as the enhanced mixing
observed above 20 mT.
For a quantitative description of the carbon relaxation
with our model at low ﬁeld, we need to include enhanced
direct proton-carbon mixing at low ﬁelds. This is also
consistent with the shortened times tmax to attain mixing
maxima in doped PA, and we attribute the enhanced
direct hetero-nuclear mixing to NMR line broadening due
to the presence of trityl.
At ﬁelds above 50 mT the experimentally observed re-
laxation rates are substantially smaller than those pre-
dicted.
Here the model predicts eﬃcient indirect cou-
pling via the NZ reservoir such that carbon relaxation
rates are equal to those of protons up to 2 T and beyond.
Since only core carbons in the radical vicinity exchange
directly with the NZ reservoir, we attribute this discrep-
ancy to a ﬁeld-dependent carbon diﬀusion process. This
is also consistent with the thermal mixing data, where
tmax grows with increasing ﬁeld. A diﬀusion process that
slows with increasing ﬁeld is also compatible with long
DNP build-up times at high ﬁeld24. There are two diﬀer-
ent diﬀusion processes that may each reduce the coupling
of carbon bulk spins to the Non-Zeeman reservoir.
One possibility is that this reduction arises from slow
carbon spin diﬀusion through the bulk.
At high ﬁeld
the carbon line in 1-13C PA has a signiﬁcant contribu-
tion from chemical shift anisotropy (CSA),25 and one
may expect spin diﬀusion to limit the overall 13C relax-
ation as the ﬁeld, and thereby the carbon linewidth, is
increased26. However, at the ﬁelds investigated in this
study, the carbon line is strongly dominated by dipolar
interactions, so that CSA cannot account for the observed
ﬁeld-dependence of the carbon T1.
An alternative explanation of the observed slower car-
bon relaxation rates is that the proximity to the radicals
causes a shift in the resonance frequency of the core spins,
which in turn impedes diﬀusion to the bulk spins. The
diﬀusion barrier separates the carbon spins into NMR-
invisible core nuclei in the radical vicinity, and visible
bulk nuclei outside the barrier. The diﬀusion among the
bulk nuclei is fast, and so the carbon relaxation rate
is limited by the exchange between core and bulk nu-
clei.
As measured recently by Stern et al.27, the core
spins do nonetheless exchange polarization with the bulk
spins.
This exchange was modelled with two coupled
reservoirs representing the core and bulk spins, respec-
tively, where the diﬀusion barrier limits the exchange of
Zeeman energy between these reservoirs.27 The energy
ﬂow across the barrier is frequently attributed to dipolar
interactions28–31, and it is conceivable that the coupling
of the two reservoirs is ﬁeld-dependent, since more Zee-
man energy has to be transferred across the barrier at
higher ﬁelds. However, no experimental studies of this
coupling for 13C have have been presented to date, nor
its ﬁeld-dependence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tom Wenckebach for numerous discussions
and assistance with the relaxation model.
We thank
Lloyd Lumata for discussions and for providing the
OX063 low-ﬁeld EPR spectrum and the high-ﬁeld 13C
T1 data, and David Gadian for discussions and help with
experiments.
We thank Matthias Ernst and Malcolm
Levitt for discussions.
This work has been supported
by EPSRC (EP/R031959/1) and by the “Impuls- und
Vernetzungsfonds of the Helmholtz-Association” under
grant VH-NG-1432. This project has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 951459).
∗hana.kourilova@kit.edu
† michael.jurkutat@kit.edu
‡ benno.meier@kit.edu
1 J. H. Ardenkjær-Larsen, B. Fridlund, A. Gram, G. Hans-
son, L. Hansson, M. H. Lerche, R. Servin, M. Thaning,
and K. Golman, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 100, 10158 (2003).
2 J. H. Ardenkjær-Larsen, Handbook of High Field Dynamic
Nuclear Polarization , 239 (2019).
3 W. K¨ockenberger, “Dissolution dynamic nuclear polariza-
tion,” in eMagRes, eMagRes (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
2014) pp. 161–170.
4 D. Kurzbach and S. Jannin, “Dissolution dynamic nuclear
polarization methodology and instrumentation,” in eMa-
gRes (American Cancer Society, 2018) pp. 117–132.
5 S. J. Nelson, J. Kurhanewicz, D. B. Vigneron, P. E. Z.
Larson, A. L. Harzstark, M. Ferrone, M. van Criekinge,
J. W. Chang, R. Bok, I. Park, G. Reed, L. Carvajal,
E. J. Small, P. Munster, V. K. Weinberg, J. H. Ardenkjær-
Larsen, A. P. Chen, R. E. Hurd, L.-I. Odegardstuen, F. J.
Robb, J. Tropp, and J. A. Murray, Science Translational
Medicine 5, 198ra108 (2013).
6 Z. J. Wang, M. A. Ohliger, P. E. Z. Larson, J. W. Gordon,
R. A. Bok, J. Slater, J. E. Villanueva-Meyer, C. P. Hess,
J. Kurhanewicz, and D. B. Vigneron, Radiology 291, 273
(2019).
7 F. A. Gallagher, R. Woitek, M. A. McLean, A. B. Gill,
R. M. Garcia, E. Provenzano, F. Riemer, J. Kaggie,
A. Chhabra, S. Ursprung, J. T. Grist, C. J. Daniels,
F. Zaccagna, M.-C. Laurent, M. Locke, S. Hilborne,
A. Frary, T. Torheim, C. Boursnell, A. Schiller, I. Patter-
son, R. Slough, B. Carmo, J. Kane, H. Biggs, E. Harrison,
S. S. Deen, A. Patterson, T. Lanz, Z. Kingsbury, M. Ross,
B. Basu, R. Baird, D. J. Lomas, E. Sala, J. Wason, O. M.
Rueda, S.-F. Chin, I. B. Wilkinson, M. J. Graves, J. E.
Abraham, F. J. Gilbert, C. Caldas,
and K. M. Brindle,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 2092
(2020).
8 R. Woitek, M. A. McLean, S. Ursprung, O. M. Rueda,
R. M. Garcia, M. J. Locke, L. Beer, G. Baxter, L. Rundo,



===== PAGE 6 =====

6
E. Provenzano, J. Kaggie, A. Patterson, A. Frary, J. Field-
Rayner, V. Papalouka, J. Kane, A. J. Benjamin, A. B.
Gill, A. N. Priest, D. Y. Lewis, R. Russell, A. Grimmer,
B. White, B. Latimer-Bowman, I. Patterson, A. Schiller,
B. Carmo, R. Slough, T. Lanz, J. Wason, R. F. Schulte,
S.-F. Chin, M. J. Graves, F. J. Gilbert, J. E. Abraham,
C. Caldas, K. M. Brindle, E. Sala, and F. A. Gallagher,
Cancer Research 81, 6004 (2021).
9 K. Kouˇril, H. Kouˇrilov´a, S. Bartram, M. H. Levitt,
and
B. Meier, Nature Communications 10, 1733 (2019).
10 K. Kouˇril, M. Gramberg, M. Jurkutat, H. Kouˇrilov´a, and
B. Meier, Magnetic Resonance 2, 815 (2021).
11 P.
Niedbalski,
Q.
Wang,
C.
Parish,
F.
Khashami,
A. Kiswandhi,
and L. Lumata, The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B 122, 1898 (2018).
12 A. J. Horsewill and Q. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 4,
5475 (2002).
13 D. T. Peat, M. L. Hirsch, D. G. Gadian, A. J. Horsewill,
J. R. Owers-Bradley, and J. G. Kempf, Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 18, 19173 (2016).
14 L. Lumata, Z. Kovacs, A. D. Sherry, C. Malloy, S. Hill,
J. van Tol, L. Yu, L. Song,
and M. E. Merritt, Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 15, 9800 (2013).
15 M. L. Hirsch, N. Kalechofsky, A. Belzer, M. Rosay,
and
J. G. Kempf, Journal of the American Chemical Society
137, 8428 (2015).
16 C. Hess, J. Herick, A. Berlin, W. Meyer, and G. Reicherz,
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec-
tion A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Asso-
ciated Equipment 694, 69 (2012).
17 e. a. Jurkutat, M., submitted (2022).
18 A. Abragam and W. G. Proctor, Physical Review 106, 160
(1957).
19 A. Abragam and W. G. Proctor, Physical Review 109, 1441
(1958).
20 S. F. J. Cox, V. Bouﬀard,
and M. Goldman, Journal of
Physics C: Solid State Physics 6, L100 (1973).
21 W. Wenckebach, Essentials of Dynamic Nuclear Polariza-
tion (Spindrift Publications, 2016).
22 W. Wenckebach, Journal of Magnetic Resonance 299, 124
(2019).
23 W. Wenckebach, Journal of Magnetic Resonance 299, 151
(2019).
24 J. H. Ardenkjær-Larsen, S. Bowen, J. R. Petersen, O. Ry-
balko, M. S. Vinding, M. Ullisch, and N. C. Nielsen, Mag-
netic Resonance in Medicine 81, 2184 (2018).
25 S. Macholl, H. J´ohannesson, and J. H. Ardenkjaer-Larsen,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 5804 (2010).
26 Y. Wang and K. Takeda, New Journal of Physics 23,
073015 (2021).
27 Q. Stern, S. F. Cousin, F. Mentink-Vigier, A. C. Pinon,
S. J. Elliott, O. Cala, and S. Jannin, Science Advances 7,
nil (2021).
28 A. Z. Genack and A. G. Redﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 12, 78
(1975).
29 S. F. J. Cox, S. F. J. Read, and W. T. Wenchebach, Jour-
nal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 10, 2917 (1977).
30 A. E. Dementyev, D. G. Cory, and C. Ramanathan, Phys.
Rev. B 77, 024413 (2008).
31 G. B. Furman, S. D. Goren, V. M. Meerovich, and V. L.
Sokolovsky, Applied Magnetic Resonance 52, 781 (2021).
