

===== PAGE 1 =====

Citation: Nguyen, T.M.; Vo, H.H.-P.;
Yoo, M. Enhancing Intrusion
Detection in Wireless Sensor
Networks Using a GSWO-CatBoost
Approach. Sensors 2024, 24, 3339.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s24113339
Academic Editor: Weizhi Meng
Received: 9 May 2024
Revised: 16 May 2024
Accepted: 20 May 2024
Published: 23 May 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Enhancing Intrusion Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks
Using a GSWO-CatBoost Approach
Thuan Minh Nguyen 1
, Hanh Hong-Phuc Vo 1
and Myungsik Yoo 2,*
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul 06978, Republic of Korea;
1102360003@soongsil.ac.kr (T.M.N.); hanhvo@soongsil.ac.kr (H.H.-P.V.)
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul 06978, Republic of Korea
*
Correspondence: myoo@ssu.ac.kr
Abstract: Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) rely heavily on
effective feature selection (FS) for enhanced efficacy. This study proposes a novel approach called
Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization (GSWO) to address the limitations of conventional methods.
GSWO combines a genetic algorithm (GA) and whale optimization algorithms (WOA) modified by
applying a new three-population division strategy with a proposed conditional inherited choice (CIC)
to overcome premature convergence in WOA. The proposed approach achieves a balance between
exploration and exploitation and enhances global search abilities. Additionally, the CatBoost model
is employed for classification, effectively handling categorical data with complex patterns. A new
technique for fine-tuning CatBoost’s hyperparameters is introduced, using effective quantization
and the GSWO strategy. Extensive experimentation on various datasets demonstrates the superiority
of GSWO-CatBoost, achieving higher accuracy rates on the WSN-DS, WSNBFSF, NSL-KDD, and
CICIDS2017 datasets than the existing approaches. The comprehensive evaluations highlight the
real-time applicability and accuracy of the proposed method across diverse data sources, including
specialized WSN datasets and established benchmarks. Specifically, our GSWO-CatBoost method
has an inference time nearly 100 times faster than deep learning methods while achieving high
accuracy rates of 99.65%, 99.99%, 99.76%, and 99.74% for WSN-DS, WSNBFSF, NSL-KDD, and
CICIDS2017, respectively.
Keywords: wireless sensor networks; intrusion detection; feature selection; hyperparameter opti-
mization; machine learning
1. Introduction
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have emerged as a pivotal technology with a grow-
ing presence in various application areas, including environmental monitoring, healthcare,
industrial automation, and smart cities [1]. These networks of tiny, interconnected sensors
are ideally suited for collecting real-time information about their surroundings. In re-
cent years, there has been a notable upsurge in WSN research, driven by the extensive
array of real-time applications [2]. In particular, a noteworthy study published in IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications (TWC) in 2023 focused on the throughput max-
imization of wireless-powered communication networks with mobile access points [3].
In addition to the aforementioned study, numerous recent works have contributed to the
advancement of WSNs. For example, “Energy-Saving Routing Protocols for Smart Cities”
(Medeiros et al. [4], 2022) proposed energy-efficient routing protocols tailored for WSNs
deployed in smart cities. Furthermore, “Secure and scalable data aggregation techniques for
healthcare monitoring in WSN” (Vidyapeeth et al. [5], 2023) addressed the critical aspect of
data security in WSNs deployed in healthcare settings. These recent works demonstrate the
ongoing efforts of researchers to tackle various challenges in WSNs, including throughput
maximization, energy efficiency, and data security.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3339. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24113339
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors



===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
2 of 26
Within the context of security, the reliability of WSNs is seriously threatened by
numerous typical attacks, including Hello Flooding, Wormholes, Sinkholes, and Jamming,
which cause abnormal traffic behavior by upsetting the network’s traffic patterns [6].
Therefore, intrusion detection in WSNs stands out as a crucial topic [7]. Because intrusion
detection addresses the critical issue of ensuring data integrity and network security in
environments with constrained resources, its importance cannot be understated. Effective
identification and mitigation of such attacks are necessary to preserve the integrity and
functionality of these networks. The challenges of intrusion detection posed by WSNs are
fundamentally different from those encountered by conventional networks [8].
It has been established that the use of machine learning (ML) is reliable for network
intrusion detection [9,10]. In addition, ML has recently emerged as a promising method
for handling intricate data [11,12]. Furthermore, its extensive utilization in identifying
anomalous network activities may be attributed to its ease of use and effectiveness [13–15].
However, the increasing network traffic poses challenges to the performance of ML in
real-time data analysis because excessive irrelevant data are being gathered.
In general, the ultimate efficacy of ML depends on the quality of the available data [16],
the relevance of features, and the extent to which models and algorithms can approach
their performance ceiling. As computer technology continues to find applications in
various facets of human society, an increasing number of real-world dataset feature spaces
encompass tens of thousands of dimensions [17]. Nonetheless, only a fraction of these
dimensions truly encapsulate the intrinsic nature of the phenomena under investigation.
This subset of pertinent features is overshadowed by the profusion of irrelevant and
redundant features, which severely impairs the performance of ML algorithms.
To address this challenge, numerous methodologies have been proposed to leverage
ML with population-based algorithms inspired by natural processes. Researchers have
focused their investigations on several prominent metaheuristic algorithms whose com-
ponents can be optimized, and those binary counterparts are appropriately tailored to
address the intricacies of FS. Among these, the whale optimization algorithm (WOA) [18]
has emerged as a noteworthy candidate owing to its adaptable characteristics, minimal
control parameters, and straightforward structural design. However, the applicability of the
WOA and its variants is constrained when addressing high-dimensional, intricate problems.
Notably, issues such as diminished population diversity and premature convergence to sub-
optimal solutions have become more pronounced, as evidenced by empirical assessments
and analytical findings [19]. Consequently, our study is motivated by the imperative to
propose enhancements to WOA that facilitate the discovery of superior solutions, striking
a harmonious balance between extracting a feature subset of elevated quality to augment
prediction accuracy and achieving dimensional reduction to mitigate inference time.
Furthermore, tuning the hyperparameters of ML models is critical for optimizing the
performance and predictive accuracy of these models [20]. This process involves adjusting
the hyperparameters and model configurations to ensure the most effective adaptation to
the resource-constrained and dynamically changing nature of WSNs.
In this study, we introduce a specifically designed intrusion detection model, assisted
by metaheuristic optimization, to comply with WSN characteristics. We briefly summarize
our contributions as follows:
-
We propose a new approach called Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization (GSWO)
that ingeniously combines a genetic algorithm (GA) and WOA modified by applying
a new three-population division strategy with the proposed conditional inherited
choice for FS. The proposed algorithm can eliminate the premature convergence of the
standard WOA and strike a balance between exploration and exploitation abilities.
-
Moreover, we harnessed the capabilities of the CatBoost model as a classifier, distin-
guishing between the benign data and diverse attack patterns within the dataset.
-
In addition, we introduce a new method for fine-tuning CatBoost’s hyperparameters,
incorporating quantization and an optimization approach akin to FS (GSWO).



===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
3 of 26
-
Finally, we rigorously evaluate the proposed methodology using a comprehensive
range of datasets, encompassing established benchmarks such as CICIDS 2017 and
NSL-KDD as well as specialized WSN datasets including the WSN dataset and the
WSNBFSF dataset, which was published in 2023. These comprehensive evaluations
underscore the accuracy and real-time applicability of the proposed method on various
data sources.
The subsequent sections of this manuscript are structured as follows: Section 2 delves
into the related literature and research. Section 3 explains the comprehensive IDS proposed
for WSNs. Section 4 expounds on the GSWO algorithm, detailing its application in FS and
the fine-tuning of hyperparameters. The experimental results and performance analysis
are presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 provides the concluding remarks and outlines
avenues for future research.
2. Related Work
2.1. WSN Intrusion Detection
Almomani et al. [21] developed a specialized dataset called WSN-DS, tailored for WSN
intrusion detection. They employed an artificial neural network (ANN) on this dataset,
which resulted in enhanced accuracy in the detection and classification of DoS attacks.
Subsequently, in 2023, Dener et al. [22] introduced a novel dataset, WSN-BFSF, specifically
designed to detect DoS attacks in WSNs. Their investigation involved the evaluation of
four ML and eight deep-learning models, yielding notable outcomes.
Vinayakumar et al. [23] devised a hybrid IDS for detecting and classifying attacks.
They introduced a scalable deep neural network (DNN) framework called scale-hybrid-
IDS-AlertNet, which was designed to combat network attacks. The proposed methodology
assessed diverse datasets, including CICIDS2017, WSN-DS, UNSW-NB15, and NSL-KDD,
and exhibited commendable accuracy across various network traffic types. However, their
study lacked a comprehensive discussion regarding computational time efficiency [24].
Le et al. [6] implemented a random forest algorithm to classify four types of DoS
attacks using the WSN-DS dataset. This study involved a comparative analysis of the
performance of random forest and ANN algorithms. The findings demonstrated the efficacy
of random forest as a robust machine-learning method adept at overcoming overfitting
challenges and outperforming ANN. However, it is pertinent to note that the study’s
results were derived from a relatively limited dataset comprising 94,042 instances during
the testing phase [25]. It is worth mentioning that this investigation exclusively considered
the LEACH routing protocol, while other protocols remained unexplored.
Salmi and Oughdir [26] developed and implemented various models, including DNN,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and hybrid
RNN–CNN architectures, for the detection of DoS attacks in WSNs. The models were
trained using the WSN-DS dataset, with the CNN exhibiting superior performance with an
accuracy rate of 98.79%. Notably, compared to ML models, deep learning models introduce
a heightened computational overhead. Given the inherent constraints of WSNs, lightweight
security solutions are imperative for addressing these network limitations.
Although there have been significant advancements in the development of specialized
datasets and the application of various machine learning and deep learning models for
intrusion detection in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), there is still a significant research
gap in terms of accuracy and inference time. This shortcoming stems from the intrinsic
complexity of the current models, which are applied directly to raw data with high noise
levels and no FS stage, leading to long inference times in real-world applications. Moreover,
the aforementioned ML models do not yet incorporate hyperparameter optimization strate-
gies designed to obtain the best possible performance of the models in certain wireless
sensor network situations.



===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
4 of 26
2.2. Metaheuristic Optimization Inspired Feature Selection for Intrusion Detection
Jiang et al. [27] introduced SLGBM, an IDS tailored for WSNs. This study integrated
the Sequence Backward Feature Selection (SBS) algorithm with the LightGBM classification
algorithm to enhance the detection rate while mitigating computational overhead. Through
experimentation utilizing the WSN-DS dataset, the SLGBM method demonstrated superior
performance in terms of the F1-score for the four types of network attacks compared with
existing detection methods. However, this study did not explicitly address the scalability
of the SLGBM method.
Liu et al. [28] proposed a particle swarm optimization-based gradient descent (PSO-
LightGBM) model for intrusion detection in IoT, which aimed to address the limitations of
traditional intrusion detection technology in a complex and changeable IoT environment.
The model uses PSO-LightGBM to extract features from the data and input them into a one-
class SVM (OCSVM) for the discovery and identification of malicious data. The proposed
model performs well in terms of accuracy and false alarm rate (FAR) and shows good
robustness and reliability on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. However, there have been no
comparisons in terms of effectiveness between PSO and other metaheuristic algorithms.
Vijayanand et al. [29] presented a novel FS approach combining WOA and genetic
operators sequentially to enhance the accuracy of IDSs within Wireless Mesh Networks
(WMN) utilizing Support Vector Machines (SVM). This study replaced the probing compo-
nent of WOA with crossover and mutation operators. A performance evaluation conducted
on the CICIDS2017 and ADFA-LD standard datasets showed the method’s superiority
over conventional WOA and GA in terms of attack detection rate, accuracy, and suitability.
However, this study did not provide insights into the efficiency of the proposed method
compared to other metaheuristic algorithms.
Hussain et al. [30] proposed an IDS designed specifically for WSNs, utilizing a CNN
architecture for classification and a hybrid WOA–artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm for
FS. When combined with the recommended CNN architecture, this method outperformed
PSO and achieved an overall accuracy of 98%, according to the experimental evaluation
on the NSL-KDD dataset. However, it is important to mention that the hybrid WOA-
ABC algorithm, which combines two large optimization algorithms, might increase the
computing complexity and resource requirement.
Mohiuddin et al. [31] presented an effective IDS that combines a whale optimization
technique, which is a modified wrapper-based algorithm with a sine-cosine FS algorithm
and a Weighted Extreme Gradient Boosting (XgBoost) classifier. The objective of this
method is to enhance the prediction quality and prevent local optima by broadening the
search and effectively selecting an ideal solution using the sine–cosine function. Using
the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS datasets, the proposed model successfully classified bi-
nary and multi-class attacks with notable accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score metrics.
Nevertheless, significant constraints exist concerning the scalability, computational effi-
ciency, and applicability of the proposed model to various network contexts that have not
been discussed.
Kasongo et al. [32] proposed a method that employs a GA for FS and a random forest
(RF) model for classification within an IDS designed for Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
networks. The GA-RF approach attained a test accuracy of 87.61% and an Area Under
the Curve (AUC) of 0.98 for binary classification, demonstrating superior performance
compared with existing IDS frameworks. The effectiveness and robustness of the proposed
approach are evaluated using the UNSW-NB15 dataset. This methodology integrates the
advantages of GA for FS and RF for classification, thereby enhancing the security, privacy,
and integrity of IIoT networks.
A thorough analysis of the aforementioned studies on WSN intrusion detection specifi-
cally concentrates on FS inspired by metaheuristic optimization, with a particular emphasis
on the WOA, revealing significant trends and unmet needs. First, more research is needed
to determine whether these metaheuristic optimization-based FS techniques, particularly
WOA, are applicable and scalable in a variety of large-scale network contexts. Secondly,



===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
5 of 26
there is a lack of discussion on how to effectively compare alternative metaheuristic op-
timization techniques for FS over a range of intrusion detection datasets. Finally, we
acknowledge that a close examination of the tradeoff between the WOA’s exploration and
exploitation capabilities is necessary to propose a novel approach for improving WOA
for FS.
2.3. Fine-Tuning Hyperparameters for Machine Learning Model
Random search, which was developed by Bergstra et al. [33], is a traditional method
that uses stochastic selection to determine hyperparameter values. Although a random
search is known for being quick, it does not always guarantee the best possible results.
Grid Search, on the other hand, provides an extensive examination of the hyperparameter
space for a predetermined subset. It should be noted that using the Grid Search approach
might become unfeasible if the parameter space is too large.
Bayesian optimization, introduced by Quitadamo et al. [34], is a robust methodology
for fine-tuning the hyperparameters associated with computationally demanding and
resource-intensive processes. It operates by generating a probabilistic model that is subse-
quently optimized to strategically guide the selection of the next evaluation points for the
model’s objective function. All prior function evaluations inform this decision.
Furthermore, Olson et al. [35] proposed the Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool
(TPOT), an algorithm that leverages genetic programming techniques, and demonstrated its
capacity to autonomously identify high-performing machine learning algorithm pipelines
without requiring domain-specific expertise or human intervention. Notably, the genetic
approach is particularly well-suited for expansive search spaces, although it is essential to
acknowledge that computational efficiency may be limited, albeit adjustable, through the
manipulation of parameters such as the number of generations and population size.
SHERPA [36], introduced by Hertel et al., is an advanced hyperparameter tuning
methodology primarily engineered to cater to tasks requiring resource-intensive and itera-
tive function assessments, particularly in contexts such as hyperparameter optimization
for deep learning models. Akiba et al. [37] proposed a new hyperparameter optimiza-
tion software called Optuna (version 3.6.1), which is characterized by its capacity to dy-
namically construct parameter search spaces, efficiently implement search and pruning
strategies, and offer a flexible and easily deployable architecture suitable for a wide range
of applications.
An illustrative example is the work by Gabriel et al., who introduced a novel model
termed BSOXGB [38] (BorutaShap feature selection combined with Optuna hyperparam-
eter tuning of eXtremely Gradient Boost), achieving a notable accuracy of 97.70% in the
diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease (CAD). They underscored the importance of data
preprocessing (DP) and hyperparameter tuning (HP) to ensure optimal performance in
CAD prediction models.
In conclusion, based on the recent studies comprehensively reviewed above, we found
that to achieve the highest accuracy and efficiency, it is necessary to combine and enhance
pertinent FS, ML models, and hyperparameter optimization techniques. Therefore, we
propose a novel IDS that integrates a proposed optimization strategy called GSWO to select
pertinent features and fine-tune hyperparameters for the CatBoost classifier. A summary of
the intrusion detection methods mentioned above and our work in this context is presented
in Table 1.



===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
6 of 26
Table 1. Some recent works about intrusion detection in WSN.
Year
Authors
Feature
Selection
Model
Parameters
Fine-Tuning
Type of
Classification
Dataset
Accuracy (%)
2023
Salmi and
Oughdir [26]
None
DNN,
CNN,
RNN,
CNN+RNN
None
Multi-class
WSN-DS
97.04,
98.79,
96.48,
96.86
2020
Jiang et al.
[27]
SBS
LightGBM
None
Multi-class
WSN-DS
99.53
2019
Vinayakumar
et al. [23]
None
DNN
None
Multi-class &
Binary
KDD Cup’99,
NSL-KDD,
UNSW-NB15,
CICIDS2017,
WSN-DS
95.00–99.00,
95.00–99.00,
65.00–75.00,
93.00–96.00,
96.00–99.00
2018
Le et al. [6]
None
Random
Forest
None
Multi-class
WSN-DS
98.00
2021
Liu et al. [28]
PSO-
LightGBM
OCSVM
None
Multi-class
UNSW-NB15
86.68
2020
Vijayanand
et al. [29]
WOA-GA
(sequentially)
SVM
None
Multi-class
CICIDS2017,
ADFA-LD
95.91,
94.44
2023
Mohiuddin
et al. [31]
WOA-SCA
XgBoost
None
Multi-class &
Binary
UNSW-NB15,
CICIDS2017
91.00–99.00,
96.00–98.00
2023
Kasongo et al.
[32]
GA
RF
None
Multi-class
UNSW-NB15
87.61
2022
Hussain et al.
[30]
WOA-ABC
DNN
None
Multi-class
NSL-KDD
98.00
2024
Our
GSWO
CatBoost
GSWO
Multiclass
NSL-KDD,
CICIDS2017,
WSN-DS,
WSNBFSF
99.79,
99.74,
99.62,
99.99
3. Proposed System
An intrusion is defined as a malicious activity that gains network access and imple-
ments unauthorized tasks. IDSs’ role is to secure networks by detecting malicious and
unauthorized activities. Figure 1 describes the proposed IDS in WSNs and the overall
procedure inside it from the training stage to the testing stage.
The proposed intrusion detection model comprises two stages. The first stage involves
selecting the most prominent features, and the second stage involves classification with
hyperparameter optimization. After preprocessing the data to eliminate redundant data
and noise, some informative features are selected using our proposed GSWO algorithm
and the CatBoost classifier as fitness functions. A CatBoost-based ensemble learning
approach [39,40] was developed to effectively detect and classify intrusive behaviors in
terms of both accuracy and inference time when implemented in a real environment.
However, few studies have used CatBoost in this field because of the difficulty of tuning
the parameters to optimize the model and obtain the highest efficiency. The CatBoost
hyperparameters affect the complexity of the model, training time, chance of overfitting,
and speed of convergence. Therefore, the proposed GSWO algorithm was employed
to address this problem after selecting the most informative features from the former
block. After completing this specific phase in the training stage, the trained and optimized
CatBoost model verifies its performance with the test set, including only useful features.



===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
7 of 26
Figure 1. Overall intrusion detection system architecture.
4. Proposed Work
4.1. Preliminaries
4.1.1. Whale Optimization Algorithm
Mirjalili and Lewis drew inspiration from the predation behavior of humpback whales
to formulate a WOA in 2016 [18]. The algorithm emulates the feeding strategy of humpback
whales, which is characterized by diving near the surface of the water and employing a
spiral pattern to trap prey within a net of bubbles. This predation behavior was delineated
into three distinct stages.
•
Encircling prey;
•
Searching for prey;
•
Bubble-net attacking.
The probability rate ρ1 is employed for each whale to dynamically transition between
the strategies of encircling prey/searching for prey and bubble-net attacks during the opti-
mization process. In addition, individuals utilize a coefficient vector⃗At to make strategic
choices between the two techniques of encircling and searching for prey. The complete
computation for updating the position of each individual in the WOA is determined by
Equation (1). In this equation, the probability rate ρ1 is a stochastic value within the range
(0, 1), and the coefficient vectors⃗At and⃗Ct are calculated using Equations (2) and (3),
respectively, where⃗ra and⃗rc are two vectors of a random number between [0, 1], and vector
a is a linear reduction from 2 to 0 in direct proportion to the number of iterations according
to Equation (4), where t and M are the current iteration and the maximum number of
allowed iterations. [·] is an element-by-element multiplication.⃗
Xt+1 =









Encircling
(ρ1 ≤0.5) and
⃗At ≤1

.
Searching
(ρ1 ≤0.5) and
⃗At > 1

.
Attacking
(ρ1 > 0.5).
(1)⃗
At = 2a · ra −a.
(2)⃗
Ct = 2 ∗⃗rc.
(3)
a = 2 −t 2
M.
(4)



===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
8 of 26
Encircling prey technique: The whales begin by encircling their target as a strategic
move. Subsequently, they designated a search agent, making their choice dependent on the
distance between each whale and the prey. Once the search agent was identified, all the
whales within the collective adjusted their positions following the chosen leader. From a
mathematical perspective, this process is expressed as follows:⃗
Dt =
h⃗
Ct ·⃗Xt
∗−⃗Xti
.
(5)⃗
Xt+1 =⃗Xt
∗−⃗At ·⃗Dt.
(6)
Here,⃗Xt∗is the position vector of the best whale (a locally optimal solution), while⃗
Xt is the position vector of the normal whale at the current iteration.⃗Xt+1 is the updated
position vector of the same whale with⃗Xt. The distance between each whale and the search
agent is expressed as⃗Dt.
Searching for prey technique: The WOA enhances the exploration capability across
the whale population using the search-for-prey method. Exploration involves expanding
the search space and identifying potential alternative solutions. In this method, a whale
opts to advance toward a randomly chosen search agent position for global exploration,
deviating from the conventional approach of moving toward the best-solution whale in
the current iteration. Equations (7) and (8) are then employed to compute the random
position of the search agent for updating, where⃗Xt
rand is the position vector of the randomly
chosen whale.⃗
Dt =
h⃗
Ct ·⃗Xt
rand −⃗Xti
.
(7)⃗
Xt+1 =⃗Xt
rand −⃗At ·⃗Dt.
(8)
Bubble-net attack technique: The whale enhances its exploitation ability by modifying
the shrink position within the helix-shaped movement toward the prey, as governed by
Equation (9). Here, the parameter b represents a constant indicative of the logarithmic
spiral’s shape, and l constitutes a random number within the specified range of [−1, 1].
The computation of the distance between the search agent (without multiplying with
coefficient⃗Ct) and each whale D
′t is determined by Equation (10)⃗
Xt+1 =⃗D
′t · ebl · cos(2πl) +⃗Xt
∗.
(9)⃗
D
′t =
⃗Xt
∗−⃗Xt.
(10)
Despite being a well-known optimization technique, the WOA has some drawbacks,
including poor population diversity, early convergence, and an imbalance across search
strategies. Consequently, several WOA variations have been proposed since its debut to
address its shortcomings. This study aims to address these shortcomings by appropriately
integrating a GA and the WOA.
4.1.2. Genetic Algorithm
A GA is a heuristic technique used to improve results in a variety of applications.
A previous study [41] shows how populations are represented as inputs in a chromosomal
format and how they refine the parent population in each subsequent generation using
three basic operations: selection, crossover, and mutation. The crossover process makes
it easier for genetic features from the two parent organisms to combine. This is achieved
by identifying a crossover spot on the parent chromosome structure. Following this,
the last segment of one parent’s chromosome past the specified point is exchanged with
the matching segment of the second parent’s chromosome and vice versa, creating a new
population. The entire crossover process is illustrated in Figure 2 with the green arrows
shows the process of exchanging the genes of two individuals. The offspring that are



===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
9 of 26
produced possess the traits of both parents. Compared to the parents’ chromosomes,
the child’s unique combination may provide better or worse outcomes.
Figure 2. Crossover operator.
The purpose of the mutation operation is to avoid the problem of being trapped in
local optima [42]. This process facilitated the generation of new individuals by modifying
their random characteristics. Binary values are randomly reversed to convert 1s into 0s
and vice versa in order to carry it out. For example, as graphically shown in Figure 3,
the introduction of a mutation point at the individual’s third, sixth, and eighth positions
cause the chromosome to mutate. The bold shows selected genes for mutation and the red
color illustrates the new value of genes after mutation.
Figure 3. Mutation operator.
4.2. Proposed Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization
The GSWO proposed in this study was used to address global optimization and
engineering design challenges. Based on fitness value, the whale population was divided
into three subpopulations, each with a different number of individuals based on fitness
values, as shown in Equations (11) and (12).
v = Fitmax −Fitmin,
(11)
where Fitmax is the highest fitness value, while Fitmin is the lowest fitness value in the
population at a specific iteration. v is the distance between the best individual and the
poorest individual.





Fit > Fitmax −1
3 ∗v : Explore.
Fit < Fitmin + 1
3 ∗v : Exploit.
The remaining is hesitant subpopulation.
(12)
A corresponding calculation formula exists for the fitness value depending on the
application. In this study, the fitness value is the false prediction rate of the model classifi-
cation, so the smallest fitness value is the best.
The exploratory subpopulation includes whales with higher fitness values that are far
from the current optimal solution. They are expected to strengthen the global exploration
capabilities of the algorithm, allowing a systematic examination of more search spaces.



===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
10 of 26
Therefore, the searching for prey technique, which includes Equations (7) and (8), is suitable
to execute the recalibration of this subpopulation’s location.
In contrast, individuals with lower fitness values, which fall into the exploitative
subpopulation, need to increase inspection of the surrounding region to accelerate con-
vergence [43]. Therefore, both the encircling prey technique and the bubble-net attack
technique can be utilized randomly to modify the location of this subpopulation. For a
complete description of the specifics, see Equation (13), where the probability rate ρ2 is a
random value between the interval [0,1]. The⃗Dt and⃗D
′t are given in Equations (5) and (10),
respectively.
(⃗
Xt+1 =⃗Xt∗−⃗At ·⃗Dt
(ρ2 > 0.5).⃗
Xt+1 =⃗D
′t · ebl · cos(2πl) +⃗Xt∗
(ρ2 ≤0.5).
(13)
The hesitant subpopulation includes the remaining individuals with fitness values
between good and poor. These individuals employ a balanced strategy that incorporates
the whole process of traditional WOA and ensures a blend of exploration and exploitation.
This strategy is represented mathematically by Equation (1).
In GSWO, we re-evaluated all individuals in line with their current fitness levels
after each iteration. Consequently, the makeup of the individuals in each subpopulation
varies constantly with each iteration. Figure 4 shows a schematic diagram of GSWO
with the three-population division strategy. Unlike the traditional WOA, in the block
“Sorting the whale population”, Equation (12) is employed to divide the whole population
into three subpopulations based on the fitness value. Approximately one-third of the
individuals (exploratory subpopulation or the blue part) engage in global exploration,
including Equations (7) and (8). Another third (exploitative subpopulation or the orange
part) engages in local exploitation, including Equation (13), and the other third (hesitant
subpopulations or the green part) inherits all traditional WOA traits, including Equation (1).
Additionally, the exploratory and exploitative subpopulations implement genetic operators
(the branch on the left side) in the next paragraph. After that, four branches are concatenated
before calculating the fitness value and conducting the proposed conditional inherited
choice. During iterative procedures, this architecture gives GSWO the flexibility to conduct
both global and local explorations.
Figure 4. Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization Algorithm.
However, if only this three-population structure were used, its tendency would still be
more towards exploitation than exploration for two reasons. Firstly, individuals gravitate
toward random peers during the exploration phase, limiting their ability to increase explo-
ration and expand their search field. Secondly, the WOA algorithm has two exploitation



===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
11 of 26
techniques: encircling prey technique and Bubble-net attack technique, while there is only
one technique, searching for prey, to explore and expand the search area. A parallel branch
of the genetics operator is proposed to address the problem of an imbalance between
exploration and exploitation in this optimization algorithm. Exploitative and exploratory
subpopulations were copied and stored in a new matrix to perform genetic operators.
For this branch, the position of each whale is considered as a chromosome. Our proposed
method performs a crossover between a good individual and a poor individual to create
more diversity instead of a crossover between two good individuals, as in the traditional
GA, which creates two new nearly identical chromosomes similar to the parents, leading to
less diversity. Another point that makes our technique suitable for combination with WOA
is that it only takes one child with more chromosomes from a good parent, which is the
individual in exploitative subpopulations. Furthermore, to avoid bias in the exploration
phase, we propose the formula presented in Equation (14) to control the number of genes
changing among parents and retain some informative chromosomes. After that, we used a
traditional mutation method.
k = round(0.5 × O −0.4 × O × t
M),
(14)
where k is the number of genes performing the crossover, t is the current iteration index,
and M is the total iteration. Based on extensive experiments, it is beneficial for k to
decrease linearly from half to 10% of the total number of genes (O) because, in some early
iterations, individuals cannot determine which chromosomes are helpful. However, later
on, individuals in the exploitative population identified that they contained chromosomes
that carried much information, so fewer genes needed to be exchanged.
The number of individuals in the population increases after new individuals are
created through the GA. Assuming that the WOA population is N and the GA population
is G, the new population is a combined (N + G) population, leading to a population boom
after some iterations. To avoid a population explosion, which leads to high computational
costs, a conditional choice strategy, inspired by the Altruism strategy [44], is proposed to
sacrifice individuals in the new population with the number of sacrificed whales equal
to G. Therefore, the similarity index (SI), which is described in Equation (15), is used to
calculate the similarity score of each whale with their counterparts in the population.
SI =
1
HD(⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2) +
Fitt
1 −Fitt
2
 + ξ1
,
(15)
where⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2 are candidate individuals and Fitt
1, Fitt
2 are their fitness values. HD represents
the Hamming distance between⃗Xt
1 and⃗Xt
2. The Hamming distance, denoted by (⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2),
quantifies the disparity between two binary-encoded candidate solutions by counting
the points of variation. A minimal value ξ1 is added to the denominator to prevent
errors in scenarios where the denominator becomes zero. After calculating, one of the
two individuals in pairs with the highest SI will be removed randomly. The number of
individuals removed is equal to G to ensure the consistency of the algorithm, which is a
final population size of N after each iteration.
A flowchart of the GSWO is illustrated in Figure 4. The pseudocode for the proposed
method is presented in Algorithm 1.



===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
12 of 26
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code for the GSWO
Initialize randomly the population of GSWO
Initialize the parameters a,⃗A,⃗C
Calculate the fitness values of all individuals
Determine the presently optimal solution X∗
while t ≤M do
Compute v using Equation (11)
Determine the Exploitative, Exploratory, and Hesitant subpopulation using Equation (12)
Duplicate Exploitative and Exploratory subpopulation
for each member in exploitative sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (13)
end
for each member in exploratory sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (8)
end
for each member in hesitant sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (1)
end
Determine the number of crossovers G
Select G parents 1st from the exploitative subpopulation
Select G parents 2nd from the exploratory subpopulation
Calculate the changing genes k using Equation (14)
for from 0 to G do
Implement a crossover operator with k
Implement mutation
end
Examine the boundaries and compute the fitness values for all individuals.
Then, X∗is updated by sorting all individuals
Implementation of the conditional choice scheme
t = t + 1
end
return the X∗
4.3. CatBoost Classification Model
This study employed CatBoost as a WSN data classifier and attack detector. Based on
decision-tree techniques, CatBoost is a fast, high-performance gradient-boosting system.
CatBoost creates balanced trees with a symmetric structure, which sets it apart from other
gradient-boosting algorithms such as XGBoost and LightGBM. This implies that all the
nodes in a level are subjected to the same feature-split pair that yields the lowest loss
in each phase. Among the many benefits of this balanced design is its ability to build
CPUs efficiently, shorten prediction times, apply models quickly, and function as a type of
regularization to avoid overfitting.
CatBoost accommodates diverse data types, including numeric, categorical, and tex-
tual data. Categorical attributes, which are inherently noncomparable and pose a challenge
to the direct utilization of binary trees. In contrast to prevalent gradient boosting-based
methodologies such as one-hot encoding (OHE), gradient statistics (GS), target statistics
(TS), greedy TS, holdout TS, and leave-one-out TS, CatBoost employs an advanced or-
dered TS approach. This strategy mitigates the issues related to target leakage, diminishes
overfitting, and enables using a complete dataset for training purposes [39,45].
In CatBoost, the initial definition of hyperparameters is imperative for optimizing
predictive accuracy. Specifically, determining parameters such as the number of trees is sig-
nificant because it directly affects the potential for encountering overfitting or underfitting
challenges. The parameter d (maximum depth) reflects the learning capacity inherent in the
base tree; a higher value augments the learning process of the individual base tree, whereas
a lower value diminishes it. The learning rate parameter governs the velocity at which



===== PAGE 13 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
13 of 26
the iterative parameters converge toward the optimal values, substantially influencing the
training speed.
Previous hyperparameter optimization methods, such as random and grid search,
were time-consuming but did not fully use the ranges. Thus, in this study, a GSWO
approach was used to fine-tune the hyperparameters of CatBoost, and prior data were
used to investigate the likely optimal parameter combination. Consequently, the GSWO-
CatBoost hybrid algorithm was created.
4.4. Applying GSWO for Feature Selection
To apply the GSWO algorithm to a specific task, defining the total iteration (M),
the number of crossovers (G), the number of whales in the population (N), and the form
of each whale in the population as input and a fitness function as the target for this
algorithm is required. The output is the candidate whale with the lowest fitness value.
In this section, we apply GSWO for FS. To begin with, the total iteration (M), the number of
crossovers (G), and the number of feature subsets in the population (N) are considered to be
hyperparameters, which vary based on a specific dataset. These hyperparameters must be
chosen pertinently to ensure that the GSWO can achieve the most useful feature subset and
optimize the computational time. In addition, the form of whales in the input population,
a feature subset, is illustrated as binary arrays comprising 0s and 1s. In this representation,
a position of a feature marked 0 implies exclusion, whereas a position of another feature
marked 1 implies inclusion in the feature subset for calculating fitness value. Therefore,
a feature subset in the input population⃗Xt
i is characterized as a binary array of dimensions
D, which is the number of whole features in a specific dataset. For instance, the WSN-DS
dataset [46] has eighteen features. Through comprehensive experiments for this dataset,
the total iteration (M), the number of crossovers (G), and the number of feature subsets
in the population (N) are set as 30, 20, and 30, respectively. An initial population that has
30 feature subsets can be depicted in Figure 5. Note that an initial population is initialized
randomly because the algorithm will update the feature subsets in the population to find
the best subset, including only the useful features, to minimize the fitness function.
Figure 5. An example of an input whale population for FS.
Subsequently, the fitness function for FS is defined in Equation (16), where the value of
the weight β is set as 0.9 through comprehensive experiments in this study; err(⃗Xt
i) is the
false prediction rate of the CatBoost model, which is gained from training and evaluating
it on a particular dataset with the features in a feature subset⃗Xt
i; sum(⃗Xt
i) is the sum of
features in the feature subset⃗Xt
i, such as sum(⃗X1
1) = 8, as depicted in Figure 5.
Fiti = β × err(⃗Xt
i) + (1 −β) × sum(⃗Xt
i)
D
.
(16)
The fitness function is a weighted sum of the classification model error and the
proportion of features present in the candidate solution. Therefore, the optimization goal
involves minimizing the fitness function. This fitness function ensures a reduction in the
rate of false predictions and that as few features as possible are maintained.
Finally, Algorithm 1 is applied to run the GSWO algorithm 30 rounds. As a result,
a feature subset with the lowest fitness value, corresponding to the most useful features
subset, is determined. Figure 6 illustrates that the second feature subset, which has the
lowest fitness value, is chosen as the output of GSWO for FS. In summary, the most useful



===== PAGE 14 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
14 of 26
feature subset, represented by the second whale, consists of features of order [0, 5, 6, 8, 9,
13, 14, 15, 17].
Figure 6. An example of a result of GSWO for FS.
4.5. Applying GSWO for Hyperparameter Optimization
This study developed an ensemble-learning approach based on CatBoost to identify
intrusive behaviors in WSNs. The optimization of CatBoost hyperparameters poses a
challenge, promoting the proposal of GSWO and quantization [47] are introduced as
solutions. The hyperparameters considered in this study include learning rate (α), depth (d),
iteration (iter), L2 regularization term (l2), bagging_temperature (b), and random_strength
(r). The roles of these parameters in CatBoost’s performance are as follows:
CatBoost typically employs 1000 trees by default. Consequently, a higher number of
iterations leads to increased training and inference times, while excessively few iterations
may yield subpar results. Striking an optimal balance in the number of iterations is crucial
for maintaining speed and accuracy. Simultaneously, adjusting the learning rate became
necessary as the number of iterations decreased, emphasizing the importance of selecting
an appropriate learning rate for optimal model performance. Although CatBoost’s default
learning rate is often close to optimal, it can be finetuned to achieve the best-suited values.
Similarly, hyperparameters such as depth, random strength, bagging temperature, and L2
regularization terms require optimization to identify the tradeoff that maximizes accuracy.
To apply GSWO for hyperparameter optimization, the form of each whale in the input
population must be a binary array. However, the types of these hyperparameters, integer or
float, are unsuitable for the input of our proposed method GSWO and do not optimize the
computing resources regarding speed and accuracy. Therefore, we proposed quantization
to convert these hyperparameters into a binary array before feed-forwarding to GSWO.
The quantization included three steps:
Step 1: Calculate the range of values within the specified range using Equation (17).
value_range = max_value −min_value.
(17)
Step 2: Calculate the step size for each bit using Equation (18), where num_bits is the
total number of bits used for representation.
step_size = value_range
2num_bits
.
(18)
Step 3: Quantize the number using Equation (19) and convert it to a binary array.
quantized_value = round
number −min_value
step_size

,
(19)
where the number is the value to be quantized.
Each hyperparameter is represented by the number of bits appropriate to its allowable
value range. In this study, through extensive experiments, the specific range of each
hyperparameter and the number of bits is set as follows:
•
α ∈range[0.001, 0.5] is illustrated by 14 bits.
•
d ∈range[2, 9] is illustrated by 3 bits.
•
iter ∈range[50, 690] is illustrated by 6 bits.
•
l2 ∈range[2, 9] is illustrated by 3 bits.



===== PAGE 15 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
15 of 26
•
r ∈range[0, 10] is illustrated by 8 bits.
•
b ∈range[0, 10] is illustrated by 8 bits
As a result, the form of a candidate whale in the input population is illustrated in
Figure 7. Through comprehensive experiments for fine-tuning hyperparameters of the
CatBoost model, the total iteration (M), the number of crossovers (G), the number of
whales in the population (N) are set as 40, 20, and 30, respectively. In addition, an initial
population of 30 whales can be depicted in Figure 8. Note that an initial population is
initialized randomly.
Figure 7. An example of a candidate whale for hyperparameter optimization.
Figure 8. An example of an input whale population for hyperparameter optimization.
The fitness function for hyperparameter optimization was different from that for FS.
To optimize hyperparameters to enhance the accuracy and inference speed, minimizing the
error of the classification model, iterations, and depth is necessary. Therefore, the fitness
function for hyperparameter optimization, which is the weighted sum of the errors of
the classification model, iterations, and depth, is defined by Equation (20). Therefore,
the optimization goal involves minimizing the fitness function.
Fiti = γ × err(⃗Xt
i) + 1 −γ
2
× iter + 1 −γ
2
× d,
(20)
where the value of the weight γ is set as 0.9 through comprehensive experiments in this
study; err(⃗Xt
i) is the false prediction rate of the CatBoost model, which is gained from
training and evaluating it on a specific dataset with the hyperparameters established in the
candidate whale⃗Xt
i.
Finally, Algorithm 1 is applied to run the GSWO algorithm 30 rounds. As a result,
a candidate whale with the lowest fitness value, corresponding to the most effective
hyperparameters for the CatBoost model to process a specific dataset, is determined.
Figure 9 illustrates that the first whale, which has the lowest fitness value, is chosen as the
output of GSWO for hyperparameter optimization.
Figure 9. An example of a result of GSWO for hyperparameter optimization.



===== PAGE 16 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
16 of 26
5. Experiments and Evaluations
5.1. Dataset Description
5.1.1. NSL-KDD Dataset
The first dataset, NSL-KDD from [46], is a typical dataset used for classification during
implementation. This dataset has 41 unique parameters, including the content type, core
category, and traffic categorization, which are thoroughly explained in Table 2. Each data
input reveals a wide variety of flow characteristics, each of which is methodically classified
as an attack category or a normal instance.
Table 2. NSL-KDD Dataset description [48].
Criteria
Description
Dataset’s name
NSL-KDD
Quantity of records
149,470
Quantity of network features
41
Quantity of attack categories
4 (DoS, Probe, R2L, U2R)
Characteristics of network features
Basic features, host features, traffic features,
and content features
Furthermore, the 42nd presents five unique types of system connection vectors. These
vectors are then classified into a normal category and four distinct attack types. As outlined
in [49], the four categories of attacks—Denial of Service (DoS), Probe, Remote to Local
(R2L), and User to Root (U2R)—are further categorized into specific types of intrusions.
This dataset is considered a merging set, which is divided into training and testing
sets with a rate of 7:3. The statistics of each attack class are listed in Table 3. We used
this dataset to demonstrate that our method works well for both categorical features and
numerical features.
Table 3. Summarizing the distribution of training and testing set in this study.
Datasets
The Traffic Type
Training Set
Testing Set
NSL-KDD dataset
Benign
54,093
22,960
Dos
37,424
16,138
Probe
9780
4299
R2L
2490
1079
U2R
173
79
CICIDS2017 dataset
Normal
260,415
65,266
Bot
1561
382
Brute Force
6824
1727
DoS/ DDoS
256,401
63,868
Infiltration
27
9
Portscan
45,779
11,526
Web Attack
1716
402
WSN-DS dataset
Blackhole
8104
1945
Grayhole
10,598
2624
Flooding
2405
597
TDMA
5306
1322
Normal
259,621
65,020
WSN-BFSF dataset
Normal
210,223
52,628
Flooding
23,913
5931
Blackhole
9441
2325
Forwarding
6108
1537



===== PAGE 17 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
17 of 26
5.1.2. CICIDS2017 Dataset
The CICIDS-2017 dataset, sourced from the ISCX Consortium, has a prominent position
in the landscape of WSN research, particularly in the domain of network intrusion detection.
This dataset is a valuable resource for investigating and understanding network security
challenges in real-world contexts. With its systematic arrangement, the dataset encompasses
eight discrete traffic monitoring sessions, each presented in a comma-separated value (CSV)
format. The categorization of network traffic involves the classification into “Benign” for
regular activities and “Attacks” for a diverse array of intrusion attempts. Offering a rich
array of 14 different attack types, including sophisticated scenarios such as Infiltration,
Bot attacks, and DDoS, the dataset enables researchers to explore complex attack patterns
reflective of contemporary network environments.
According to CICIDS-2017, datasets characterized by a notable class imbalance tend
to exhibit diminished detection accuracy and increased false alarm rates. The approach
advocated by Karimi et al. [50] and Panigrahi and Borah [51] proposed novel labeling
methodologies for attack traffic, as shown in Table 4. Additionally, because many instances
of normal traffic were included in this dataset, we extracted only 20% of the normal traffic
data for training and testing. The numbers of each class are also shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Data distribution of relabeled attack.
New Labels
Old Labels
Distribution
Percentage
Normal
Benign
325,681
45.49
Bot
Bot
1943
0.27
Brute Force
FTP-Patator, SSH-Patator
8551
1.19
DoS/DdoS
DDoS, DoS Hulk, Heartbleed, Slow, DoS slowloris, GoldenEye, DoS, httptest
320,269
44.74
Infiltration
Infiltration
36
0.005
Portscan
Portscan
57,305
8.01
Web Attack
Web Attack-Sql Injection, Web Attack-XSS, Web Attack-Brute Force
2118
Moreover, including advanced features tailored to detect specific attack types en-
hances their utility in modeling and analyzing the intricacies of network intrusions. Thus,
the CICIDS-2017 dataset is a crucial tool for conducting in-depth research and evaluating
the intrusion detection model [52]. This dataset was also separated into two sets for training
and testing, the distribution of which is presented in Table 3.
5.1.3. WSN-DS Dataset
A Wireless Sensor Network Dataset (WSN-DS) [21] facilitates the application of diverse
intelligent and data mining methodologies to enhance the detection and classification
of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. This leads to sensor nodes acquiring proficiency in
discerning normal behaviors and promptly identifying the signatures of attackers, thereby
enabling timely and well-informed decision-making. The dataset employed the LEACH
routing protocol to extract 23 attributes crucial for evaluating the status of each node within
the network. It is noteworthy that, in the CSV files, certain attributes such as RSSI, max
distance to CH, the average distance to CH, and current energy are removed.
Within this dataset, researchers have specifically delineated four types of DoS attacks
using the LEACH protocol. These encompass Blackhole, Grayhole, Flooding, and Schedul-
ing (or TDMA) attacks. Notably, the dataset includes a category for “Normal” nodes,
serving as a reference for non-attacker nodes. This initiative ensures that the dataset com-
prehensively covers both malicious and benign network behaviors, thereby fostering the
development and evaluation of robust intrusion detection mechanisms tailored to WSNs.
The distributions of 70% of the dataset for training and 30% for testing are presented in
Table 3.



===== PAGE 18 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
18 of 26
5.1.4. WSN-BFSF Dataset
The WSN-BFSF dataset incorporates instances of Blackhole, Flooding, and Selective
Forwarding attacks. Unlike the WSN-DS dataset, the WSN-BFSF dataset encompassed data
specifically related to the Selective Forwarding attack. This dataset, comprising 312,106
instances across 16 distinct features, presents a comprehensive landscape for the analysis
of WSN traffic, particularly focusing on the identification and differentiation of various
attack vectors along with normal network operations. The dataset encapsulates a diverse
range of traffic types, including Blackhole attacks, Flooding attacks, Selective Forwarding
attacks, and normal traffic. This rich compilation of data, derived from post-meticulous pre-
processing, provides an invaluable resource for deepening our understanding of network
vulnerabilities and the dynamics of cyber threats in WSNs.
5.2. Evaluation Metrics
In this investigation, widely utilized metrics in academic literature, including accuracy,
precision, recall, F-score, inference time, and ROC curves, were employed to evaluate the
performance results. These metrics are applicable in diverse classification scenarios [53,54].
The assessment values are derived by comparing the classification outcomes generated by
various ML or deep learning algorithms with the specified classification values, thereby
effectively interpreting the model outputs. These metrics rely on the foundation of a
confusion matrix incorporating key elements such as true positives (TPs), true negatives
(TNs), false positives (FPs), and false negatives (FNs). TP signifies cases correctly identified
as attacks, TN represents samples accurately categorized as normal, FP indicates normal
samples misclassified as attack samples, and FN denotes attack samples erroneously
classified as normal samples.
Equation (21) formulates the accuracy parameter as the ratio of all correctly classi-
fied samples (TP, TN) to the total samples (TP, TN, FP, and FN). Precision, as defined in
Equation (22), quantifies the number of accurate positive (TP) predictions, emphasizing the
ratio of all correctly classified attacks (TP) to the total number of correctly classified attacks
(TP) and erroneously classified normal samples (FP). Equation (23) computes recall as the
number of accurate positive predictions out of all potential positive predictions. Precision
considers only accurate positive predictions, whereas recall encompasses both accurate
and inaccurate predictions. The F1-score (Equation (24)) serves as a balanced measure of
model performance, relying on the harmonic mean of sensitivity and recall. The F1-score,
which assigns equal importance to precision and recall, has emerged as a frequently utilized
metric in the realm of learning from data [55]. Inference time, which represents the time it
takes the model to infer the entire test set, was also incorporated as a metric for comparison
with other studies. Additionally, a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used
to plot the true positive rate against the false positive rate for different threshold values.
In ROC curves, the x-axis shows the false positive ratio, whereas the y-axis shows the
true positive ratio. Therefore, results close to the upper-left corner were considered ideal.
Moreover, a ten-fold cross-validation approach was implemented for each model in our
experiments to ensure realistic and dependable results.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN .
(21)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP.
(22)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN .
(23)
F1-score = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall .
(24)



===== PAGE 19 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
19 of 26
5.3. Results and Analysis
In this section, the efficacy of the proposed model is assessed. All experimental trials
were conducted on a Windows 11 personal computer equipped with an Intel Core i7 CPU
operating at 3.80 GHz and with 16 GB of RAM.
In this study, we selected four typical metaheuristic algorithms, namely the original
WOA, the original GA, sine–cosine algorithm (SCA), and bat algorithm (BA), for compari-
son with our proposed GSWO algorithm in terms of the level of convergence and ability to
select useful features. Figure 10 show the level of convergence of the algorithms during
the FS process, Table 5 illustrates the features selected from the algorithms, and Table 6
compares the performance using classification metrics. These algorithms set the number
of populations to 30 and the maximum iteration to 30. In this comparison, hyperparam-
eters are set as follows: iterations: 500; learning_rate: 0.05; depth: 2; l2_leaf_reg: 3.0;
random_Strength: 1; bagging_templates: 1; od_wait: 20; the remaining are the default.
Note that the highest results are shown in boldface.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 10. The convergence of algorithms for (a) NSL−KDD, (b) CICIDS2017, (c) WSN−DS, and
(d) WSNBFSF.



===== PAGE 20 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
20 of 26
Table 5. Features selected after FS technology.
Datasets
Feature Selection Methods
Feature Orders
WSN-DS
WOA
[0, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 17]
GA
[3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17]
SCA
[2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 11, 14, 17]
BA
[0, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 17]
Our GSWO
[0, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 17]
WSNBFSF
WOA
[0, 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12]
GA
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12]
SCA
[3, 4, 7, 8, 10]
BA
[0 2 4 6 8 14]
Our GSWO
[0, 3, 4, 10, 12]
NSL-KDD
WOA
[0, 2, 4, 5, 7, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 32, 34, 36, 37, 38, 41]
GA
[0, 2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41]
SCA
[2, 3, 4, 5, 19, 20, 22, 28, 29, 31, 35, 36, 38, 41]
BA
[0, 2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 16, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41]
Our GSWO
[0, 1, 2, 4, 15, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 40, 41]
CICIDS2017
WOA
[0, 1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 26, 28, 33, 34, 37, 40, 43, 45, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 66]
GA
[0, 8, 12, 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, 24, 26, 30, 32, 34, 38, 39, 44, 48, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 62]
SCA
[0, 15, 16, 24, 38, 41, 42, 48, 54, 55, 56, 62]
BA
[0, 3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 22, 23, 24, 27, 32, 33, 41, 42, 46, 51, 52, 55, 56, 58, 62, 65]
Our GSWO
[0, 1, 8, 10, 13, 24, 25, 31, 34, 41, 42, 44, 57, 65]
Table 6. Comparison of performance metrics of FS algorithms.
Datasets
Method
Acc
Prec
Rec
F1
WSN-DS
All features
98.01
92.81
85.80
89.01
WOA
98.23
93.53
88.87
90.90
GA
98.24
93.58
88.86
90.92
SCA
98.23
93.49
88.86
90.88
BA
98.23
93.50
88.87
90.88
Our GSWO
98.25
93.62
88.85
90.93
WSNBFSF
All features
93.81
46.97
50.00
48.44
WOA
96.76
94.78
76.74
82.91
GA
96.76
94.66
77.74
82.89
SCA
99.13
96.43
95.95
96.18
BA
99.58
98.53
98.39
98.45
Our GSWO
99.68
98.64
98.92
98.77
NSL-KDD
All features
98.40
96.29
77.10
77.78
WOA
98.49
91.44
80.89
82.92
GA
98.87
95.47
85.94
88.44
SCA
98.42
93.62
78.87
79.97
BA
98.86
95.34
81.63
83.31
Our GSWO
98.89
94.33
86.92
89.19
CICIDS2017
All features
95.23
40.45
41.60
41.00
WOA
99.00
69.50
67.74
68.52
GA
99.13
69.17
68.58
68.84
SCA
99.35
82.54
77.83
79.81
BA
99.01
68.85
68.52
68.66
Our GSWO
99.37
98.35
81.90
86.22



===== PAGE 21 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
21 of 26
The findings are illustrated in Figure 10, which emanate from a comparative analysis
involving the proposed GSWO algorithm and other prominent algorithms. GSWO takes
advantage of the good exploitation capabilities of the conventional WOA, boosts global
search capabilities through the parallel use of extra genetic operators, and strikes a balance
between exploratory and exploitative tendencies. Especially noteworthy is its performance
in the context of large datasets, demonstrating superior outcomes as shown in Figure 10b
for the CICIDS2017 dataset. These empirical observations substantiate the GSWO’s efficacy
in circumventing local optima, establishing its capacity to find optimal solutions with
greater precision than alternative algorithms, particularly the traditional WOA.
The results, which are illustrated in Table 6, prove that the features selected by the
proposed GSWO improved the classification rate on various datasets in terms of all classifi-
cation metrics compared with the traditional WOA, GA, and other metaheuristic optimiza-
tions and raw data. In particular, the results of the proposed method on the CICIDS 2017
dataset demonstrate that it can work effectively with a large dataset.
To evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm for hyperparameter optimiza-
tion, we used some of the most popular hyperparameter tuning methods, such as random
search, grid search, and Optuna. Table 7 presents the values of CatBoost’s hyperparameters,
which are the results of the algorithms, and Table 8 compares the efficiencies of these
methods based on the evaluation metrics as presented in Section 5.2. The useful features
selected from the GSWO-based FS were used in this comparison.
A detailed comparative analysis of the metrics was used to evaluate the performance
of some popular hyperparameter optimization approaches, such as grid search, random
search, and Optuna, and the proposed method is presented in Table 8. After the experi-
ments, we conclude that the proposed method can find productive hyperparameters to
assist the classifier in correctly detecting and classifying various types of attacks. Therefore,
the results indicate an enhancement of the proposed model for solving intrusion detection
problems in complex and diverse WSN environments.
Table 7. Results of hyperparameter optimization techniques.
Datasets
Techniques
Hyperparameter Values
WSN-DS
Grid search
[‘iter’: 211, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 1, ‘r’: 1, ‘b’: 1]
Random search
[‘iter’: 204, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 3, ‘r’: 2, ‘b’: 2]
Optuna
[‘iter’: 427, ‘α’: 0.46122, ‘d’: 11, ‘l2’: 2.5, ‘r’: 1, ‘b’: 2.748]
Our method
[’iter’: 370, ‘α’: 0.3033, ‘d’: 6, ‘l2’: 2.0, ‘r’: 8.9063, ‘b’: 0.7031]
WSNBFSF
Grid search
[‘iter’: 179, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 1, ‘r’: 4.5, ‘b’: 2]
Random search
[‘iter’: 216, ‘α’: 0.07, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 3, ‘r’: 1, ‘b’: 1]
Optuna
[‘iter’: 912, ‘α’: 0.3768, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 6, ‘r’: 1, ‘b’: 7.577]
Our method
[‘iter’: 270, ‘α’: 0.28817, ‘d’: 5, ‘l2’: 2.0, ‘r’: 0.15625, ‘b’: 1.09375]
NSL-KDD
Grid search
[‘iter’: 235, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 1, ‘r’: 5, ‘b’: 5]
Random search
[‘iter’: 284, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 3, ‘r’: 2, ‘b’: 2]
Optuna
[‘iter’: 515, ‘α’: 0.28, ‘d’: 6, ‘l2’: 2, ‘r’: 8.95, ‘b’: 3.34]
Our method
[‘iter’: 515, ‘α’: 0.3, ‘d’: 6, ‘l2’: 2, ‘r’: 8.9, ‘b’: 3.3]
CICIDS2017
Grid search
[‘iter’: 220, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 3, ‘r’: 2.5, ‘b’: 3]
Random search
[‘iter’: 220, ‘α’: 0.1, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 3, ‘r’: 2.5, ‘b’: 3]
Optuna
[‘iter’: 376, ‘α’: 0.3246, ‘d’: 10, ‘l2’: 5, ‘r’: 1, ‘b’: 8.31]
Our method
[‘iter’: 194, ‘α’: 0.2783, ‘d’: 9, ‘l2’: 2, ‘r’: 7.707, ‘b’: 2]



===== PAGE 22 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
22 of 26
Table 8. Comparison of performance metrics of hyperparameter optimization techniques.
Dataset
Method
Acc
Prec
Rec
F1
WSN-DS
Grid search
99.62
97.31
97.46
97.42
Random search
99.59
97.18
97.69
97.37
Optuna
99.60
97.39
97.51
97.40
Our method
99.62
97.27
97.78
97.47
WSNBFSF
Grid search
99.98
99.98
99.97
99.98
Random search
99.98
99.96
99.96
99.96
Optuna
99.97
99.94
99.82
99.88
Our method
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
NSL-KDD
Grid search
97.66
95.33
93.76
94.89
Random search
99.76
96.37
93.99
95.05
Optuna
99.75
96.77
95.71
96.21
Our method
99.79
96.46
96.48
96.47
CICIDS2017
Grid search
99.73
97.68
89.67
92.81
Random search
99.73
98.05
87.89
91.32
Optuna
99.70
97.66
90.02
92.88
Our method
99.74
97.39
93.68
95.32
In addition, from the ROC curves shown in Figure 11, the proposed algorithm was
quite successful for all classes in the four different datasets.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 11. ROC curves for proposed system in (a) NSL-KDD dataset, (b) CICIDS2017 dataset,
(c) WSN-DS dataset, and (d) WSNBFSF dataset.
Furthermore, to ensure realistic and reliable results, a ten-fold cross-validation ap-
proach was implemented for each dataset in our experiments, as illustrated in Table 9.
Finally, Table 10 shows a comparison of the performance of the proposed system with
state-of-the-art techniques for each dataset in WSNs. As shown in Table 10, the proposed



===== PAGE 23 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
23 of 26
system surpasses other existing methods in the WSN field in terms of accuracy, precision,
recall, F1-score, and inference time. This approach leverages a GSWO-based technique for
FS in sensor-node traffic data, effectively mitigating the dimensionality of traffic features.
Subsequently, a CatBoost algorithm coupled with GSWO-based hyperparameter optimiza-
tion was employed to enhance the accuracy of the model, uphold a commendable detection
rate, and reduce computational time overhead. This method addresses the prevalent short-
comings of existing FS and classification algorithms in WSN IDSs, notably the issues of
suboptimal detection performance and limited real-time responsiveness. The proposed
model demonstrated robust detection capabilities and superior real-time performance.
Table 9. Validation of the proposed method with the 10-fold cross-validation technique.
Dataset
Detection Rate (%)
WSN-DS
99.62 ± 00.04
WSNBFSF
99.99 ± 00.00
NSL-KDD
99.82 ± 00.03
CICIDS2017
99.76 ± 00.01
Table 10. Comparison of performance metrics of existing ML techniques.
Datasets
Method
Acc
Prec
Rec
F1
Infer Time
WSN-DS
CNN [26]
98.75
95.03
92.45
93.60
5.62 s
DNN [23]
96.40
97.00
96.40
96.60
2.90 s
Our method
99.65
97.27
97.78
97.47
16 ms
WSNBFSF
LSTM-CNN [22]
95.75
95.39
95.75
95.52
6.56 s
GRU [22]
99.01
99.00
99.01
98.99
5.91 s
Our method
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
13 ms
NSL-KDD
DNN [23]
94.14
88.76
88.67
88.48
1.87 s
AE [56]
89.82
91.81
90.16
90.98
3.51 s
Our method
99.76
96.17
95.14
95.63
37 ms
CICIDS2017
DNN [23]
95.60
96.20
92.60
94.70
5.76 s
CNN [26]
98.62
93.20
78.34
81.62
25.36 s
Our method
99.74
97.39
93.68
95.32
73 ms
6. Conclusions
In conclusion, this research marks a significant advancement in the intrusion detection
domain of WSNs. The proposed GSWO combines GA and WOA, modified by applying a
three-population division strategy with conditional inherited choice (CIC). This approach
addresses the critical demand for effective feature selection (FS) in WSN security, over-
coming the limitations of conventional methods, such as premature convergence. GSWO,
which ingeniously combines a genetic algorithm (GA) and the modified whale optimization
algorithm (WOA) with a conditional inherited choice (CIC), not only achieves a balance
between exploration and exploitation but also enhances global search abilities. In addi-
tion, by leveraging the advanced capabilities of the CatBoost model as a classifier and
introducing a new technique based on GSWO and the quantization for fine-tuning Cat-
Boost’s hyperparameters, our system demonstrated efficiency in WSN intrusion detection.
The comprehensive evaluations across diverse datasets, including both benchmarks and
specialized WSN datasets, demonstrate the accuracy and real-time applicability of our
method. Specifically, our method outperformed existing methods with impressive accuracy
rates of 99.65% for WSN-DS, 99.99% for WSNBFSF, 99.76% for NSL-KDD, and 99.74% for
CICIDS2017. These results underscore the effectiveness of our approach in enhancing
the accuracy of intrusion detection systems in WSNs. Furthermore, our GSWO-CatBoost
method significantly reduces the inference time, making it nearly 100 times faster than deep



===== PAGE 24 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
24 of 26
learning methods. This notable reduction in inference time is a critical advancement in
meeting the ever-increasing demand for real-time applications in WSN intrusion detection.
Our future work will aim to optimize the modified WOA further by integrating
filter-based FS methods, particularly by exploring the information gained. This iterative re-
finement aims to enhance the ability of the algorithm to select relevant features, contributing
to its overall intrusion detection performance.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.M.N.; methodology, T.M.N.; formal analysis, T.M.N.;
writing—original draft preparation, T.M.N.; writing—review and editing, M.Y. and H.H.-P.V.; visu-
alization, T.M.N.; supervision, M.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article (Section 5.1).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Chithaluru, P.K.; Khan, M.S.; Kumar, M.; Stephan, T. ETH-LEACH: An energy enhanced threshold routing protocol for WSNs.
Int. J. Commun. Syst. 2021, 34, e4881. [CrossRef]
2.
Zhao, R.; Yin, J.; Xue, Z.; Gui, G.; Adebisi, B.; Ohtsuki, T.; Gacanin, H.; Sari, H. An efficient intrusion detection method based on
dynamic autoencoder. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 2021, 10, 1707–1711. [CrossRef]
3.
Liu, X.; Xu, B.; Zheng, K.; Zheng, H. Throughput maximization of wireless-powered communication network with mobile access
points. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2022, 22, 4401–4415. [CrossRef]
4.
Medeiros, D.d.F.; Souza, C.P.d.; Carvalho, F.B.S.d.; Lopes, W.T.A. Energy-saving routing protocols for smart cities. Energies 2022,
15, 7382. [CrossRef]
5.
Vidyapeeth, K.V.; Kalbhor, L. Secure and scalable data aggregation techniques for healthcare monitoring in WSN. J. Discret. Math.
Sci. Cryptogr. 2024, 27, 441–452.
6.
Le, T.-T.-H.; Park, T.; Cho, D.; Kim, H. An effective classification for DoS attacks in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Tenth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), Prague, Czech Republic, 3–6 July 2018 ;
pp. 689–692.
7.
Butun, I.; Morgera, S.D.; Sankar, R. A survey of intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutor. 2013, 16, 266–282. [CrossRef]
8.
Sun, B.; Osborne, L.; Xiao, Y.; Guizani, S. Intrusion detection techniques in mobile ad hoc and wireless sensor networks. IEEE
Wirel. Commun. 2007, 14, 56–63. [CrossRef]
9.
Magán-Carrión, R.; Urda, D.; Díaz-Cano, I.; Dorronsoro, B. Towards a reliable comparison and evaluation of network intrusion
detection systems based on machine learning approaches. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 1775. [CrossRef]
10.
Sultana, N.; Chilamkurti, N.; Peng, W.; Alhadad, R. Survey on SDN based network intrusion detection system using machine
learning approaches. Peer-Netw. Appl. 2019, 12, 493–501. [CrossRef]
11.
Tian, Z.; Li, J.; Liu, L.; Wu, H.; Hu, X.; Xie, M.; Zhu, Y.; Chen, X.; Ou-Yang, W. Machine learning-assisted self-powered intelligent
sensing systems based on triboelectricity. Nano Energy 2023, 113, 108559. [CrossRef]
12.
Abdalzaher, M.S.; Elwekeil, M.; Wang, T.; Zhang, S. A deep autoencoder trust model for mitigating jamming attack in IoT assisted
by cognitive radio. IEEE Syst. J. 2021, 16, 3635–3645. [CrossRef]
13.
Abdi, A.H.; Audah, L.; Salh, A.; Alhartomi, M.A.; Rasheed, H.; Ahmed, S.; Tahir, A. Security Control and Data Planes of SDN:
A Comprehensive Review of Traditional, AI and MTD Approaches to Security Solutions. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 69941–69980.
[CrossRef]
14.
Fährmann, D.; Martín, L.; Sánchez, L.; Damer, N. Anomaly Detection in Smart Environments: A Comprehensive Survey. IEEE
Access 2024, 12, 64006–64049. [CrossRef]
15.
Cerdà-Alabern, L.; Iuhasz, G.; Gemmi, G. Anomaly detection for fault detection in wireless community networks using machine
learning. Comput. Commun. 2023, 202, 191–203. [CrossRef]
16.
Gite, P.; Chouhan, K.; Krishna, K.M.; Nayak, C.K.; Soni, M.; Shrivastava, A. ML Based Intrusion Detection Scheme for various
types of attacks in a WSN using C4. 5 and CART classifiers. Mater. Today Proc. 2023, 80, 3769–3776. [CrossRef]
17.
Inuwa, M.M.; Das, R. A comparative analysis of various machine learning methods for anomaly detection in cyber attacks on IoT
networks. Internet Things 2024, 26, 101162. [CrossRef]
18.
Mirjalili, S.; Lewis, A. The whale optimization algorithm. Adv. Eng. Softw. 2016, 95, 51–67. [CrossRef]



===== PAGE 25 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
25 of 26
19.
Nadimi-Shahraki, M.H.; Zamani, H.; Mirjalili, S. Enhanced whale optimization algorithm for medical feature selection: A
COVID-19 case study. Comput. Biol. Med. 2022, 148, 105858. [CrossRef]
20.
Arden, F.; Safitri, C. Hyperparameter Tuning Algorithm Comparison with Machine Learning Algorithms. In Proceedings of
the 2022 6th International Conference on Information Technology, Information Systems and Electrical Engineering (ICITISEE),
Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 13–14 December 2022; pp. 183–188.
21.
Almomani, I.; Al-Kasasbeh, B.; Al-Akhras, M. WSN-DS: A dataset for intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks. J.
Sens. 2016, 2016, 4731953. [CrossRef]
22.
Dener, M.; Okur, C.; Al, S.; Orman, A. WSN-BFSF: A New Dataset for Attacks Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE
Internet Things J. 2023, 11, 2109–2125. [CrossRef]
23.
Vinayakumar, R.; Alazab, M.; Soman, K.; Poornachandran, P.; Al-Nemrat, A.; Venkatraman, S. Deep learning approach for
intelligent intrusion detection system. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 41525–41550. [CrossRef]
24.
Wazirali, R.; Ahmad, R. Machine Learning Approaches to Detect DoS and Their Effect on WSNs Lifetime. Comput. Mater. Contin.
2022, 70, 4922–4946. [CrossRef]
25.
Tabbaa, H.; Ifzarne, S.; Hafidi, I. An online ensemble learning model for detecting attacks in wireless sensor networks. arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2204.13814.
26.
Salmi, S.; Oughdir, L. Performance evaluation of deep learning techniques for DoS attacks detection in wireless sensor network.
J. Big Data 2023, 10, 1–25. [CrossRef]
27.
Jiang, S.; Zhao, J.; Xu, X. SLGBM: An intrusion detection mechanism for wireless sensor networks in smart environments. IEEE
Access 2020, 8, 169548–169558. [CrossRef]
28.
Liu, J.; Yang, D.; Lian, M.; Li, M. Research on intrusion detection based on particle swarm optimization in IoT. IEEE Access 2021,
9, 38254–38268. [CrossRef]
29.
Vijayanand, R.; Devaraj, D. A novel feature selection method using whale optimization algorithm and genetic operators for
intrusion detection system in wireless mesh network. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 56847–56854. [CrossRef]
30.
Hussain, K.; Xia, Y.; Onaizah, A.N.; Manzoor, T.; Jalil, K. Hybrid of WOA-ABC and proposed CNN for intrusion detection system
in wireless sensor networks. Optik 2022, 271, 170145. [CrossRef]
31.
Mohiuddin, G.; Lin, Z.; Zheng, J.; Wu, J.; Li, W.; Fang, Y.; Wang, S.; Chen, J.; Zeng, X. Intrusion detection using hybridized
meta-heuristic techniques with Weighted XGBoost Classifier. Expert Syst. Appl. 2023, 232, 120596. [CrossRef]
32.
Kasongo, S.M. An advanced intrusion detection system for IIoT based on GA and tree based algorithms. IEEE Access 2021,
9, 113199–113212. [CrossRef]
33.
Bergstra, J.; Bengio, Y. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2012, 13, 281–305.
34.
Quitadadmo, A.; Johnson, J.; Shi, X. Bayesian hyperparameter optimization for machine learning based eQTL analysis. In
Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics, Boston,
MA, USA, 20–23 August 2017; pp. 98–106.
35.
Olson, R.S.; Moore, J.H. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automating machine learning. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, New York, NY, USA, 24 June 2016; pp. 66–74.
36.
Hertel, L.; Collado, J.; Sadowski, P.; Ott, J.; Baldi, P. Sherpa: Robust hyperparameter optimization for machine learning. SoftwareX
2020, 12, 100591. [CrossRef]
37.
Akiba, T.; Sano, S.; Yanase, T.; Ohta, T.; Koyama, M. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, Anchorage, AK, USA,
4–8 August 2019; pp. 2623–2631.
38.
Gabriel, J.J.; Anbarasi, L.J. Optimizing Coronary Artery Disease Diagnosis: A Heuristic Approach using Robust Data Pre-
processing and Automated Hyperparameter Tuning of eXtreme Gradient Boosting.
IEEE Access 2023, 11, 112988–113007.
[CrossRef]
39.
Dorogush, A.V.; Ershov, V.; Gulin, A. CatBoost: Gradient boosting with categorical features support. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.11363.
40.
Prokhorenkova, L.; Gusev, G.; Vorobev, A.; Dorogush, A.V.; Gulin, A. CatBoost: Unbiased boosting with categorical features. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2018, 31, 6639–6649.
41.
Shapiro, J. Genetic algorithms in machine learning. In Advanced Course on Artificial Intelligence; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 1999; pp. 146–168.
42.
Oliveto, P.S.; Paixão, T.; Pérez Heredia, J.; Sudholt, D.; Trubenová, B. How to escape local optima in black box optimisation: When
non-elitism outperforms elitism. Algorithmica 2018, 80, 1604–1633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Zhang, C.; Ji, C.; Hua, L.; Ma, H.; Nazir, M.S.; Peng, T. Evolutionary quantile regression gated recurrent unit network based on
variational mode decomposition, improved whale optimization algorithm for probabilistic short-term wind speed prediction.
Renew. Energy 2022, 197, 668–682. [CrossRef]
44.
Kundu, R.; Chattopadhyay, S.; Cuevas, E.; Sarkar, R. AltWOA: Altruistic Whale Optimization Algorithm for feature selection on
microarray datasets. Comput. Biol. Med. 2022, 144, 105349. [CrossRef]
45.
Friedman, J.H. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. Ann. Stat. 2001, 29, 1189–1232. [CrossRef]
46.
Tavallaee, M.; Bagheri, E.; Lu, W.; Ghorbani, A.A. A detailed analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set. In Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 8–10 July 2009;
pp. 1–6.



===== PAGE 26 =====

Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
26 of 26
47.
Gray, R.M.; Neuhoff, D.L. Quantization. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 1998, 44, 2325–2383. [CrossRef]
48.
Thakkar, A.; Lohiya, R. Attack classification using feature selection techniques: A comparative study. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz.
Comput. 2021, 12, 1249–1266. [CrossRef]
49.
Ao, H. Using machine learning models to detect different intrusion on NSL-KDD. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence and Electronic Engineering (CSAIEE), Virtual, 20–22 August 2021;
pp. 166–177.
50.
Karimi, Z.; Kashani, M.M.R.; Harounabadi, A. Feature ranking in intrusion detection dataset using combination of filtering
methods. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2013, 78, 21–27. [CrossRef]
51.
Panigrahi, R.; Borah, S. A detailed analysis of CICIDS2017 dataset for designing Intrusion Detection Systems. Int. J. Eng. Technol.
2018, 7, 479–482.
52.
Pelletier, Z.; Abualkibash, M. Evaluating the CIC IDS-2017 dataset using machine learning methods and creating multiple
predictive models in the statistical computing language R. Science 2020, 5, 187–191.
53.
Powers, D. ‘Evaluation: From precision, recall and F-measure to 1062 ROC, informedness, markedness & correlation. J. Mach.
Learn. Technol. 2011, 1063, 37–63.
54.
Seliya, N.; Khoshgoftaar, T.M.; Van Hulse, J. A study on the relationships of classifier performance metrics. In Proceedings of the
2009 21st IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, Newark, NJ, USA, 2–4 November 2009; pp. 59–66.
55.
He, H.; Ma, Y. Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2013.
56.
Tang, C.; Luktarhan, N.; Zhao, Y. An efficient intrusion detection method based on LightGBM and autoencoder. Symmetry 2020,
12, 1458. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
