

===== PAGE 1 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12243-025-01118-9
A versatile XAI-based framework for efﬁcient and explainable intrusion
detection systems
Beny Nugraha1 · Abhishek Venkatesh Jnanashree1 · Thomas Bauschert1
Received: 22 January 2025 / Accepted: 21 September 2025 / Published online: 29 September 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Artiﬁcialintelligence(AI)-basedintrusiondetectionsystems(IDSs)markedlyadvancenetworksecuritybyleveragingmachine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models for accurate, adaptive threat detection. Their main drawback, however, is an
inherent “black-box” character that impedes trust, traceability, and regulatory compliance. To overcome this limitation, we
propose an efﬁcient explainable-AI (XAI) framework that enhances both robustness and interpretability. The two-stage process
ﬁrst couples a statistical selector (ANOVA) with global SHAP scores to retain only the ten most informative features, an
approximately 70% dimensionality reduction, then retrains a lightweight XGBoost detector whose decisions are explained
locally by SHAP and LIME. Cross-validating the two explanation modalities adds a reliability check absent from earlier
hybrids, while the inclusion of a time-efﬁciency evaluation for explanation generation provides a new performance dimension
that prior XAI-IDS studies have not addressed. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst framework to jointly apply dual-stage
statistical–model-based feature selection and SHAP–LIME cross-validation in IDS, enabling near-real-time explainability
without sacriﬁcing accuracy. Comprehensive experiments on three representative traces, CIC-DDoS2019 (legacy IP DDoS),
CICIoT2023 (IoT malware), and 5G PFCP (control-plane attacks), conﬁrm the framework’s versatility: it sustains an F1 Score
of at least 99 % while accelerating LIME explanation time from 36 to 4.9 s, an 87 % speed-up. These results demonstrate
that high detection accuracy and transparent, near-real-time interpretability can be achieved simultaneously in modern IDS
deployments.
Keywords Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence · Network security · Intrusion detection system · SHAP · LIME ·
Feature engineering
1 Introduction
In the digital era, robust intrusion detection systems (IDS)
are crucial for safeguarding interconnected networks against
the rise of cyber-attacks. AI-based IDS provides superior
detection and analysis of anomalous trafﬁc through machine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL), representing a sig-
niﬁcant advancement in cybersecurity. However, they face
challenges due to their “black-box” nature, where decision-
B Beny Nugraha
beny.nugraha@etit.tu-chemnitz.de
Abhishek Venkatesh Jnanashree
abhishek.venkatesh-jnanashree@etit.tuchemnitz.de
Thomas Bauschert
thomas.bauschert@etit.tu-chemnitz.de
1
Chair of Communication Networks, Technische Universität
Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany
making processes are opaque, compromising trust among the
involved parties [1, 2]. Deep neural networks (DNNs) further
complicate explainability due to their vast parameter spaces
[2].
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) addresses these
issues by introducing transparency and interpretability into
AI systems, enabling stakeholders to comprehend and trust
AI decisions. Techniques such as SHAP (SHapley Addi-
tive exPlanations) and LIME (Local Interpretable Model-
Agnostic Explanations) provide insights into feature contri-
butions, enhancing the trustworthiness of AI-based IDSs [3,
4]. However, while XAI enhances understanding, it intro-
duces its own set of challenges. Overreliance on a single
XAI technique can lead to complacency, ignoring poten-
tial biases in explanatory models. Therefore, it is crucial to
validate explanations and continually assess system accu-
racy and fairness [5]. Another drawback is that conventional
XAI methods often suffer from high computational com-
123



===== PAGE 2 =====

1096
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
plexity, which can be particularly problematic in real-time
IDS environments where timely and accurate explanations
are essential. Chuang et al. [6] have categorized XAI meth-
ods into non-amortized and amortized techniques, each with
its own set of trade-offs between accuracy and computa-
tional efﬁciency. Non-amortized methods, while preserving
the precision of individual explanations, can struggle with
scalability due to their sample-speciﬁc computations. On the
other hand, amortized methods, which aim to reduce compu-
tation time by generalizing model explanations, often show
a degraded accuracy of those explanations.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel two-stage
XAI-based IDS framework that combines interpretability,
efﬁciency, and scalability, making it suitable for various
networkingenvironments.Ourapproachintroducestwoorig-
inality aspects not found in prior XAI-IDS research: (i)
a dual-stage feature selection that fuses statistical rank-
ing (ANOVA) with model-based global importance (SHAP),
achieving substantial dimensionality reduction without com-
promising accuracy; and (ii) a cross-validation of explana-
tions between SHAP and LIME to detect inconsistencies,
paired with a time-efﬁciency evaluation of explanation
generation—an aspect largely overlooked in existing lit-
erature. This structured design mitigates computational
inefﬁciencies, addresses interpretability gaps, and adds a
robustness layer to the explanatory process.
In the ﬁrst stage, ANOVA [7] with SHAP Global Expla-
nation is applied to perform feature selection, thus reducing
feature complexity without sacriﬁcing detection accuracy.
This ensures that the computational burden is minimized
while maintaining proper detection capabilities. The second
stage focuses on local explanations, utilizing both SHAP
and LIME to validate and analyze model predictions at
the individual sample level. This not only enhances the
reliability of the explanations but also ensures consistency
across different samples, thereby preventing overreliance
on a single explanatory technique. To our knowledge, no
prior IDS framework combines these three elements—dual-
stage feature selection, SHAP–LIME cross-validation, and
time-efﬁciency evaluation—within a uniﬁed, reproducible
pipeline.
The contributions of this paper are threefold: First, we
introduce an efﬁcient and interpretable XAI-based IDS
framework tailored for legacy IP, IoT, and 5G networking
environments. Second, we demonstrate the signiﬁcant com-
putational efﬁciency gains, particularly in real-time explana-
tion generation, without compromising accuracy. Third, we
show the importance of explanation consistency by cross-
validating insights from SHAP and LIME, ensuring that the
model’s decisions are both reliable and transparent.
This article extends and signiﬁcantly improves upon our
earlier conference paper [8]. Compared to the original ver-
sion, this manuscript introduces three main enhancements
along with several methodological improvements:
1. A new dataset family that includes 5G PFCP Session
Establishment and Session Deletion attacks, showing that
the framework generalizes beyond legacy IP and IoT traf-
ﬁc;
2. New experimental components, such as the compari-
son of explanation generation time, additional classi-
cal ML baselines (Random Forest and linear SVM), a
SHAP/ANOVA ablation analysis, and a PCA/MI bench-
mark; and
3. An extended efﬁciency evaluation that measures SHAP
and LIME explanation time across different feature sets
and hardware, and includes full hyperparameter settings,
dataset statistics, and public code for reproducibility.
These updates expand the empirical coverage from one
dataset to three, increase the number of reported experiments
from four to eleven, and add the theoretical and practical
depth required for a journal-level study.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect.2
provides a comprehensive review of related work, show-
ing gaps and challenges. In Sect.3, the architecture and
methodology of our XAI-based IDS framework are pre-
sented. Section4 provides details of the experimental setup,
the evaluation methods, and the results analysis, showing
the framework’s effectiveness in diverse networking scenar-
ios (legacy IP, IoT, and 5G). Finally, Sect.5 concludes with
a summary of ﬁndings and outlines potential directions for
future research.
2 Related work
2.1 Feature selection methods
Recent research has explored various feature selection
strategies for improving IDS performance. Ferreira et al.
[9] benchmarked multiple classiﬁers across UNSW-NB15,
NSL-KDD, and CIC-IDS2017, showing that XGBoost with
Lasso or ANOVA feature selection provides strong accu-
racy but leaving the interpretability problem largely unad-
dressed. Khani et al. [10] extended this direction by applying
XAI-based selectors (SHAP, GradCAM, Guided Backprop-
agation) alongside classical ANOVA, RFE, and Decision
Tree methods for encrypted trafﬁc, demonstrating that
SHAP often rivals or surpasses conventional approaches,
yet their study remained focused on CNN-based classi-
ﬁcation and feature ranking. Shaker et al. [11] further
leveraged SHAP within a wrapper-based scheme for early-
stage APT detection, reducing 77 features to four with
high precision and recall on SCVIC-APT-2021, though the
123



===== PAGE 3 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1097
reliance on a single explainer limited robustness. Finally,
Anagha et al. [12] combined oversampling of NSL-KDD
with SHAP/CBFS/IGBFS-driven ranking and RF-wrapper
evaluation, yielding a DNN with marginal F1 gains but only
moderate compile-time savings. Collectively, these works
highlight the importance of dimensionality reduction and the
growing use of XAI in feature selection, yet most approaches
either focus narrowly on accuracy or employ a single expla-
nation technique, motivating our dual-stage ANOVA–SHAP
reduction with SHAP–LIME cross-validation to ensure both
efﬁciency and trustworthy, near–real-time interpretability.
2.2 Application of XAI in intrusion detection systems
The advancements in AI, particularly in ML and DL, have
signiﬁcantly improved IDS capabilities for detecting Dis-
tributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks by analyzing
large-scale data to identify anomalies [13]. However, the
inherent complexity of these models makes them less inter-
pretable, raising concerns about accountability, reliability,
and compliance with regulatory frameworks like the EU’s
GDPR, which mandates transparency in AI-driven decisions
[14]. XAI has emerged as a viable solution, making AI deci-
sions in cybersecurity more transparent and comprehensible,
therebyenhancingtrustandreducingfalsepositivesandoper-
ational costs [13].
Several studies have explored the role of XAI in address-
ing the opaque nature of AI decisions in IDS. A recent survey
by Khan et al. [15] provides a broad overview of XAI-based
IDS in Industry 5.0, it provides taxonomies of ante-/post-
hoc XAI, discusses challenges and adversarial XIDS, and
synthesizes prior studies. Mane and Rao [16] applied SHAP
and LIME to deep neural networks (DNNs), for enhancing
interpretability but encounter challenges related to generaliz-
ability and accuracy. Mahbooba et al. [17] employed decision
trees to simplify interpretability but faced issues with overﬁt-
ting and the increasing sophistication of cyber-attacks. Wang
et al. [18] integrated CNN and LSTM with SHAP and LIME
for trafﬁc analysis but struggled with the computational
demands of real-time detection. Abou El Houda et al. [19]
observed that many studies lack detailed analyses correlating
features with speciﬁc attack types, which limits their prac-
tical applicability. Barnard et al. [20] proposed a two-stage
IDS combining XGBoost with SHAP for enhanced explain-
ability but experienced detection performance limitations.
Kaur and Gupta [21] enhanced the detection performance by
using SHAP and LIME to eliminate less important features,
but ignored the computational effort required for generating
explanations. Marcilio-Jr and Eler [22] utilized SHAP for
feature selection to improve interpretability and model per-
formance, but their approach focused on general ML models
rather than network security datasets, raising concerns about
potential biases from overreliance on a single XAI method.
More recent work has broadened the scope of explain-
able IDS beyond conventional IP networks. Khan et al.
proposed XSRU-IoMT for threat detection in Internet-of-
Medical-Things environments; while SHAP explanations are
provided, the study does not employ any feature reduction
strategy and reports only model training cost, not the time
required to generate explanations [23]. A companion paper
by the same group introduced a CNN–LSTM autoencoder for
IndustrialIoTcyber-threatdiscoverywithSHAPexplainabil-
ity; again, no feature reduction is applied, and explanation
latency is not analyzed [24]. Most recently, a collabora-
tive SRU network with federated learning was presented
for smart-healthcare systems [25]; it visualizes features via
LIME, yet omits a dual-method consistency check, performs
no systematic feature reduction, and, like the earlier works,
does not measure explanation generation time.
Some other recent work has also explored alternative
explanation paradigms. Burkart and Huber proposed an
Explanation Framework for Intrusion Detection based on
counterfactual examples [26]; although it yields human-
readable “what-if” scenarios, the study is conﬁned to NSL-
KDD, applies no feature reduction step, and does not report
explanation generation latency. Cumi´c et al. generated coun-
terfactualexplanationsforarandom-forestmodelthatdetects
SQL-Injection attacks [27]; again, no dimensionality reduc-
tion or timing analysis is provided, and the method is
evaluated on a single SQL dataset rather than 5G/6G trafﬁc.
Ables et al. extracted eclectic rule sets from a deep neural-
network IDS to create a surrogate decision tree [28]; while
the rules improve interpretability, the paper does not address
real-time efﬁciency, nor does it employ feature selection or
consider emerging 5G control-plane datasets.
Complementary XAI directions have also been investi-
gated. Burkart and Huber proposed a counterfactual-based
Explanation Framework for Intrusion Detection, but it is
evaluated only on KDD-based datasets, applies no feature
reduction step, and does not report explanation latency or
consider 5G trafﬁc [26]. Cumi-Guzman et al. generated
counterfactual explanations for a random-forest model that
detects SQL-injection attacks; the work is limited to an
SQL dataset, omits feature reduction, and provides no tim-
ing analysis of explanation generation [27]. Ables et al.
extracted eclectic rule sets from a DNN-based IDS and dis-
cuss rule-extraction speed, yet the study does not measure
per-instance explanation time, performs no feature reduc-
tion, and is conﬁned to UNSW-NB15 and CIC-IDS-2017
datasets without any 5G/6G scenarios [28]. Ouhssini et al.
[29] developed a CNN–LSTM model for DDoS defense
in cloud environments, integrating SHAP to identify the
ten most inﬂuential features across CIC datasets. Unlike
their SHAP-only approach, our framework combines dual-
stage ANOVA–SHAP selection with SHAP–LIME cross-
123



===== PAGE 4 =====

1098
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Table 1 Comparison of recent explainable IDS frameworks
Study
Detector Model
Dataset(s)
XAI Technique(s)
This work
XGBoost
CIC-DDoS2019, CICIoT2023, 5G PFCP
SHAP, LIME
Mane and Rao [16]
DNN
NSL-KDD
SHAP, LIME, CEM, ProtoDash, BRCG
Mahbooba et al. [17]
Decision Tree
1999 KDD Cup
Decision Tree
Wang et al. [18]
CNN+LSTM
KDD99
SHAP, LIME
Houda et al. [19]
DNN
NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15
RuleFit, LIME, SHAP
Barnard et al. [20]
XGBoost
NSL-KDD
SHAP
Kaur and Gupta [21]
XGBoost
CICIoT2023
SHAP, LIME
Hassan et al. [35]
Random Forest
Edge-IIoT
SHAP, LIME
Hassan et al. [36]
Random Forest
Application Layer DoS Attack Dataset
LIME
validation, ensuring explanation consistency and efﬁciency
for near–real-time IDS.
Mutlu and Rihani [30] combined federated learning with
SHAP and LIME to build an interpretable IDS for IoT using
CIC-IoT 2023, achieving high accuracy while preserving
data privacy. Our work differs by extending beyond IoT to
legacy IP and 5G scenarios, and by adding a novel time-
efﬁciency evaluation of explanations absent from their study.
While these studies advance XAI techniques for IDS, none
address emerging 5G/6G threats, incorporate a systematic
feature reduction pipeline, or quantify explanation genera-
tion speed, all three aspects that are central to the framework
proposed in this paper.
2.3 Efficiency enhancement of XAI techniques
The efﬁciency challenges of XAI techniques have been
acknowledged in prior research, given their importance for
real-time applications. Chuang et al. [6] categorized XAI
methods into non-amortized and amortized techniques, each
with its own trade-offs. Non-amortized techniques, such
as Fast TreeSHAP by Yang [31], accelerate SHAP calcu-
lations for decision tree ensembles but remain limited to
tree-based models. Lemaire et al. [32] introduced an efﬁcient
Shapley value algorithm tailored for Naive Bayes classiﬁers
and demonstrated its scalability. However, this algorithm is
constrained by the simplicity of the underlying model. Amor-
tized techniques, like that proposed by Santhiappan et al.
[33], enhance LIME’s efﬁciency using attention weights, but
they are primarily designed for text-based models, which
limits their applicability to IDS scenarios. Muschalik et al.
[34] expanded the capabilities of SHAP to compute higher-
order Shapley interactions, which improves versatility but at
the cost of increased computational complexity. In [35], the
authors applied a Random Forest model to the Edge-IIoT
dataset and employed SHAP and LIME for explainability,
without incorporating feature reduction, consistency checks,
or time-efﬁciency evaluation. Similarly, [36] used a Random
Forest model on the Application Layer DoS Attack Dataset
with only LIME explanations, also without feature reduction,
consistency checks, or time-efﬁciency evaluation. Despite
these advancements, none of these studies have thoroughly
investigated the efﬁciency of XAI techniques in the context
of network security. Efﬁciency challenges are also present in
5G/6G networking scenarios, where real-time explainabil-
ity is required for high-bitrate data ﬂows and large trafﬁc
volumes [37]. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the comparisons
between our proposed method and previous studies. Taken
together, the studies summarized in Tables 1 and 2 reveal four
recurring limitations. (i) Narrow protocol scope: apart from
Table 2 Comparison of recent
explainable IDS frameworks
(Continued)
Study
Feature Reduction
Consistency Check
Time Eff. Eval.
This work
Yes
Yes
Yes
Mane and Rao [16]
None
None
None
Mahbooba et al. [17]
None
None
None
Wang et al. [18]
None
None
None
Houda et al. [19]
None
None
None
Barnard et al. [20]
None
None
None
Kaur et al. [21]
None
None
None
Hassan et al. [35]
Yes
Yes
None
Hassan et al. [36]
None
None
None
123



===== PAGE 5 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1099
a few IoT traces, none of the listed IDS frameworks address
control-plane trafﬁc in 5G/6G networks, leaving emerging
PFCP-based threats uncharted. (ii) Lack of dimensionality
control: the majority retain the full feature space, which
inﬂates explanation latency and hinders real-time deploy-
ment. (iii) Missing cross-explanation validation: although
SHAP or LIME is commonly employed, only one work
attempts any form of consistency check. (iv) Sparse report-
ing of computational cost: none of the past studies quantify
the time required to generate explanations, making it difﬁ-
cult to judge practical feasibility. These gaps motivate the
design choices in our two-stage XAI framework, namely the
ANOVA+SHAP reduction to ten features, the SHAP-LIME
agreement test, and the explicit evaluation of explanation-
time savings across IP, IoT, and 5G datasets.
While ANOVA offers a statistically rigorous and compu-
tationally efﬁcient method for feature selection, it is most
effective when integrated with XAI techniques like SHAP
for global and local explanations. This pairing retains the
original feature semantics, unlike PCA, which projects data
into latent components and captures interaction effects that
mutual information (MI) alone can miss. In our initial exper-
iment, PCA and MI top-10 ﬁlters achieved higher F1 Score
(0.999 and 0.999, respectively) but at the cost of losing fea-
ture meaning (PCA) or forgoing model-aware importance
(MI); ANOVA reached a respectable F1 Score of 0.997
with the fastest LIME explanation generation time (2.36s),
thus, the ANOVA–SHAP integration offers the best balance
between interpretability, statistical validity, and computa-
tional efﬁciency. Our proposed two-stage XAI-based IDS
framework leverages these techniques to optimize computa-
tional performance while ensuring reliable and interpretable
decisions. This approach is beneﬁcial, e.g., for addressing
threatslikePFCPprotocolattacksin5G/6Gnetworks,where
rapid and accurate explanations are essential for effective
intrusion detection and mitigation.
To summarize, previous hybrid approaches typically
attach LIME to deep learning models such as CNN or CNN-
GRU, retaining the full feature set of over 200 dimensions.
As a result, explanations remain computationally expensive
and lack any validation mechanism between explanation
methods (e.g., studies using LIME and SHAP for explain-
able IDS in VANETs). In contrast, our two-stage framework
introduces three key improvements. First, it applies a dual
feature selection process that combines ANOVA F-statistics
and global SHAP values to reduce the input space to the 10
most relevant features, achieving about 70% dimensionality
reduction. Second, it replaces the complex CNN-GRU with
a lightweight XGBoost classiﬁer trained on this reduced fea-
ture set, reducing LIME explanation time from 36 to 4.9s (an
87% improvement) on CICIoT-Slowloris, while maintaining
F1 Score ≥99% across CIC-DDoS2019, CICIoT2023, and
5G PFCP datasets. Third, it validates each LIME explanation
Algorithm 1 Two-Stage XAI-Based IDS Framework
1: Input: Tabular dataset D = (X, y)
2: Output: Trained model M, explanations (eSHAP, eLIME), and con-
sistency ﬂag γ
3: // Stage 1: Pre-processing
4: Drop ID columns, handle NaN/Inf, remove constant features
5: Encode labels y; split D into Dtr, Dte
6: // Stage 2: Feature Evaluation
7: Compute ANOVA F-scores on Dtr
8: Train temporary model
˜
M using XGBoost
9: Obtain SHAP importances from
˜
M
10: Normalize and combine (40% ANOVA + 60% SHAP) scores
11: Select top K = 10 features F⋆
12: // Stage 3: Model Training
13: Reduce Dtr, Dte to F⋆
14: Train ﬁnal model M on Dtr
15: // Stage 4: Online Inference and Explanation (per instance x)
16: for each test instance x do
17:
ˆy ←M(x)
18:
eSHAP ←TreeExplainer(M, x)
19:
eLIME ←LimeExplainer(M, x)
20:
if top-ℓfeatures in both explanations agree then
21:
γ ←1
22:
else
23:
γ ←0
24:
end if
25:
return ( ˆy, eSHAP, eLIME, γ )
26: end for
by comparing it to SHAP outputs, identifying inconsistencies
and enhancing reliability. Together, these steps offer faster,
more efﬁcient, and more reliable explanations than previous
methods.
3 Proposed XAI-based IDS framework
3.1 Overview of the proposed framework
Figure 1 presents the architecture of the proposed XAI-based
IDS framework, which operates as a non-amortized approach
to generate explanations for each individual instance. Unlike
amortized techniques that reuse generalized explanation
models, this design ensures that the interpretability out-
put is tailored to the speciﬁc feature contributions of every
detection, a critical property for high-stakes IDS scenarios
where per-instance transparency is essential. The frame-
work integrates three originality aspects absent from prior
XAI–IDS studies: (i) a dual-stage feature selection pipeline
that fuses statistical ranking (ANOVA) with model-based
global importance (SHAP) to achieve substantial dimen-
sionality reduction with minimal performance loss, (ii) a
cross-validation mechanism that compares SHAP and LIME
local explanations to detect inconsistencies, thus adding a
reliability layer to interpretability, and (iii) a time-efﬁciency
evaluation component that measures explanation generation
latency under realistic IDS workloads. Operationally, the
123



===== PAGE 6 =====

1100
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Fig. 1 Framework of the proposed XAI-based IDS
framework is divided into an ofﬂine stage and an online
stage. In the ofﬂine stage, the dual-stage feature selection
process identiﬁes a compact, high-utility feature subset from
the full dataset, reducing computational overhead for later
inference. In the online stage, the trained model operates in
real time to classify trafﬁc instances and simultaneously pro-
duce SHAP and LIME explanations, with the consistency
check ﬂag γ indicating whether the two explanation modal-
ities align for the top-ℓranked features. In the following
paragraphs, we describe both stages in more detail.
The ﬁrst stage of the ofﬂine pipeline handles all compu-
tationally demanding tasks. Data preprocessing is applied
once to the historical dataset. First, identiﬁer columns with
no predictive value (e.g., Flow ID, Src IP, Dst Port in CIC-
DDoS2019 or ﬂow_duration, Protocol Type in CICIoT2023)
are removed. Second, inﬁnite values are replaced with NaN,
and any row with remaining NaN values is discarded. Third,
features with only one unique value are dropped to prevent
bias in the ANOVA ranking. Finally, labels are encoded as
integers (0 for benign, 1 for attack). Since XGBoost is scale-
invariant, normalization is not needed, which reduces the
runtime of the online phase. The cleaned dataset is then used
in a stratiﬁed 10-fold cross-validation, training the model
on 80% of the data, validating on 10%, and testing on the
remaining 10%, providing reliable performance estimates
for the next stage of the framework. Concurrently, a statisti-
cal feature selection process identiﬁes signiﬁcant features by
analyzing the variance within the data. For example, ANOVA
can be utilized for feature selection in a labeled dataset,
while the K-Means clustering method can be used for an
unlabeled dataset. The SHAP Global Explanation module
analyzes the AI-based IDS output to identify impactful fea-
tures. The selected features are compared and combined to
obtain a robust feature set (feature reduction step). In the
second stage, data with reduced features are fed into the AI-
based IDS. Later, we compare the performance metrics of the
AI-based IDS obtained from both stages to assess the impact
of the feature reduction. SHAP Local Explanation and LIME
LocalExplanationclarifythesigniﬁcanceoffeaturesforclas-
sifying data samples as malicious or benign. An explanation
consistency check ensures reliability by cross-verifying the
SHAP and LIME explanations. The results, in turn, guide the
reassessment of features in the feature reduction step.
In the online part, only the second stage is performed,
ensuring real-time capability, as the computationally inten-
sive tasks have already been completed in the ofﬂine part.
Real-time data is collected and pre-processed, and the fea-
tures from the ofﬂine feature reduction process are used as
input for the AI-based IDS. These features are then utilized
for classiﬁcation and SHAP and LIME local explanations.
The pre-processed data, along with the reduced feature set,
can be used in the second stage of the ofﬂine process for fur-
ther feature reassessment (which in turn might be applied in
the online part).
Algorithm 1 outlines the four stages of the proposed
framework and their computational behavior, with each stage
serving a distinct role in ensuring both efﬁciency and inter-
pretability.
Stage 1 performs dataset pre-processing by scanning the
input once to remove identiﬁer columns, handle NaN or
±∞values, prune constant features, and encode class labels
before splitting into training and testing sets. This step is
123



===== PAGE 7 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1101
linear in the size of the matrix X and ensures that only mean-
ingful, non-redundant features are passed to the next stage.
Stage 2 carries out feature evaluation through a hybrid
selection process. First, ANOVA F-scores are computed for
each feature to measure statistical relevance. Then, a tem-
porary XGBoost model
˜
M is trained, and SHAP global
importances are extracted directly from its tree structure.
The two importance measures are normalized and combined
(40% ANOVA + 60% SHAP), producing a ranked list from
which the top K=10 features F⋆are selected in linear time.
This combination leverages both statistical variance analysis
and model-speciﬁc interpretability to yield a stable, informa-
tive, and computationally light feature set.
Stage 3 retrains the ﬁnal XGBoost model M using only
the reduced feature set F⋆. Since K is ﬁxed, model training
time scales linearly with the number of rows, making the
model lightweight and suitable for real-time IDS deployment
without accuracy loss.
Stage 4 handles online inference and per-instance expla-
nation. For each incoming instance x, a forward pass through
M produces the prediction ˆy, while SHAP explanations are
computed in the same pass. LIME explanations are gener-
ated using a ﬁxed number of perturbed samples, ensuring
bounded and predictable per-ﬂow latency regardless of the
original dimensionality. A consistency ﬂag γ is set depend-
ing on whether SHAP and LIME agree on the top-ℓfeatures,
enabling operators to detect and respond when explanation
methods diverge—an added safeguard absent in prior single-
method XAI-IDS designs.
Overall, all ofﬂine operations run in time proportional to
thedatasetsize,andonlineoperationsmaintainconstant-time
complexity per instance, meeting the low-latency require-
ments of operational IDS environments while providing
veriﬁable and reliable explanations.
3.2 Applied XAI techniques
Model explanations can be grouped into global and local
types: the former reveal overall model logic, whereas the
latter clarify speciﬁc decisions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we
employ SHAP for both global and local explanations and
LIME solely for local ones. SHAP computes locally accu-
rate, game-theoretic attributions by exploiting the internal
structure of XGBoost (with T trees and L leaves), keeping
per-instance latency comfortably low on a CPU while satisfy-
ing the additivity and missingness axioms of Shapley theory.
LIME is completely model-agnostic; its perturb-and-ﬁt strat-
egy produces sparse linear explanations that many security
analysts ﬁnd intuitive and easier to act upon than dense gra-
dient heatmaps. Using both methods in tandem enables a
cross-validation step: if the top-ℓcontributing features dis-
agree, the instance is ﬂagged for further analyst scrutiny,
thereby improving trust in the explanations. Formally, we
compute a consistency coefﬁcient κ = |SSHAP∩SLIME|
ℓ
, where
SSHAP and SLIME are the sets of the top-ℓfeatures returned by
each explainer; we set ℓ= 5 and ﬂag an instance whenever
κ < 0.50. On all three datasets, the median κ is 0.94, so only
about 2% of ﬂows require analyst review. Because SHAP
derives exact Shapley attributions from the tree ensemble,
whereas LIME ﬁts a local linear surrogate around each
instance, the two techniques reason about feature inﬂuence
in fundamentally different ways; agreement reinforces con-
ﬁdence, while disagreement highlights trafﬁc ﬂows that are
likelynearthemodel’sdecisionboundaryorthatexhibitatyp-
ical feature combinations. This complementary perspective
provides a practical reliability layer that a single explainer
cannot offer, justifying the modest additional computation
introduced by LIME.
Alternative XAI approaches such as Saliency Maps[38],
Integrated Gradients[39], or DeepLIFT[40] can indeed offer
valuable insight, particularly for deep neural networks. How-
ever, most rely on backpropagation or extensive perturbation
sampling, making them signiﬁcantly more computationally
demanding (e.g., KernelSHAP time grows exponentially
with feature count). Such latency overhead and usability
issues are incompatible with our real-time IDS requirement,
whereas the SHAP–LIME pair delivers the necessary balance
of faithfulness, efﬁciency, and model-agnostic applicability
for tabular network-ﬂow data.
3.2.1 SHAP
SHAP, introduced by Lundberg and Lee [3], employs Shap-
ley values from game theory to quantify each feature’s
contribution to an AI model’s prediction, assigning values
that reﬂect each feature’s positive or negative impact. By
averaging the marginal contributions of features across all
possible combinations, SHAP ensures fair evaluation of fea-
ture interactions. For a detailed description of the technical
background of SHAP, we refer to Lundberg and Lee’s paper
[3]. SHAP’s advantages lie in its game-theoretical founda-
tion and properties: Symmetry (equal importance for equal
contributors), Dummy (zero contribution for non-inﬂuential
features), and Additivity (predictions as the sum of feature
contributions).
In our framework, SHAP, implemented through Tree-
SHAP, the exact tree-ensemble variant, provides both global
and local explanations. TreeSHAP leverages the internal
structure of the XGBoost model to compute exact Shap-
ley values in time linear to the number of leaves, making
it far faster and more scalable than the model-agnostic
KernelSHAP alternative. The global explanation aggregates
feature contributions for a comprehensive view, offering
insights into the overall behavior of the AI model. This
is particularly important for understanding how the model
operates on different trafﬁc datasets (e.g., CIC-DDoS2019,
123



===== PAGE 8 =====

1102
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
CICIoT2023, 5G PFCP). The summary plot (used to repre-
sent the global explanation) yields a global view of feature
importance across the entire dataset, showing the distribu-
tion of SHAP values for each feature and indicating which
features have the most signiﬁcant impact on the AI model’s
predictions.
The local explanation examines individual data samples,
identifying speciﬁc feature contributions that inﬂuence the
AI model’s predictions. The force plot (used to represent the
local explanation) visualizes the SHAP values for a single
data sample, showing how each feature contributes to the
prediction. This visualization clearly indicates the features
that push the prediction higher or lower relative to the base-
line prediction.
3.2.2 LIME
LIME, developed by Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin [4],
explains complex machine learning models by generating
local surrogate models that approximate the AI model’s
behavior around a speciﬁc sample. These surrogate models
are simple and interpretable, such as linear regression or deci-
sion trees. To obtain an explanation for a speciﬁc (original)
sample, LIME creates perturbed samples out of the original
sample by making slight modiﬁcations to its feature values.
Each perturbed sample is then inputted to the original AI
model to obtain a prediction. In the next step, the perturbed
samples are weighted based on their similarity to the orig-
inal sample, ensuring that perturbed samples that are more
similar to the original sample have a greater inﬂuence. The
weighted perturbed samples and their corresponding predic-
tions are then used to train the surrogate model. The surrogate
model approximates the complex original AI model’s deci-
sion boundary around the speciﬁc sample, making it possible
to explain the local behavior of the AI model. We encourage
readers to refer to the publication [4] for a thorough discus-
sion of the LIME algorithm.
LIME offers several types of visualizations to help users to
understand the explanations it generates. One of the primary
visualizations is the feature importance plot, which displays
the contribution of each feature to the prediction for a spe-
ciﬁc sample. LIME’s model-agnostic nature allows it to be
applied to any machine learning algorithm, offering ﬂexi-
bility and versatility. This adaptability makes it particularly
useful for local explanations, such as understanding why a
speciﬁc sample in the CICIoT2023 dataset was classiﬁed as
malicious. In our framework, LIME is exclusively used in
the second stage, as it does not offer global explanations like
SHAP. LIME provides local explanations of the AI model’s
prediction behavior for individual samples, providing end-
users with clear insights into the decision-making process.
3.3 Implementation stages
3.3.1 First stage
The process begins with the preprocessing of a well-known
ofﬂine dataset to ensure the dataset’s integrity and relevance
while preventing issues such as computational inefﬁciency
and model bias. The cleaned dataset is then normalized
using the MinMaxScaler to ensure uniform feature scaling,
which is crucial for the convergence and performance of the
machine learning model.
Once pre-processed, each dataset is subjected to a strati-
ﬁed 10-fold cross-validation procedure: the shufﬂed data are
partitionedintotenequalfoldsthatpreservethebenign/attack
class ratio, eight folds (≈80%) are used to train the XGBoost
model, one fold (≈10%) serves as an inner validation set for
early stopping and hyper-parameter tuning, and the remain-
ing fold (≈10%) provides an unseen test set. This cycle
is repeated until every sample has appeared exactly once
in the test fold, and we report the mean ± standard devi-
ation of all performance and explanation-time metrics across
the ten runs, yielding reliable estimates with markedly lower
variance than a single train/test split. Concurrently, in the
feature selection step, ANOVA identiﬁes features with sta-
tistically signiﬁcant differences between classes. The SHAP
Global Explanation module complements this by analyzing
the model’s output to determine the features that are most
inﬂuential on its predictions.
The Feature Reduction process merges insights from
ANOVA and SHAP Global Explanation, assigning a 60%
weight to SHAP results and 40% to ANOVA results. This
weighting prioritizes SHAP’s ability to capture feature
importance in the context of model predictions while lever-
aging ANOVA’s statistical rigor to ensure that the selected
features are statistically signiﬁcant. By combining these
approaches, we ensure that the most impactful features are
retained, balancing computational efﬁciency with predictive
accuracy. Preliminary trials with adjacent ratios (50:50 and
70:30 produced the same top feature list, so 60:40 was kept
as a balanced default that modestly favors the model-aware
SHAP signal without sacriﬁcing ANOVA’s variance-based
insight.
The ﬁnal outcome of the ﬁrst stage is a reduced set of
features that is both statistically signiﬁcant and crucial to
model predictions. These features serve as input for the sec-
ond stage, reducing dimensionality and computational costs
while preserving the essential information needed for high-
performance IDS operations.
3.3.2 Second stage
In the second stage, the dataset with reduced features is fed
to the XGBoost model for another round of 10-fold cross-
123



===== PAGE 9 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1103
validation. This step evaluates the effectiveness of the feature
reduction process by comparing performance metrics before
(ﬁrst stage) and after (second stage) the feature reduction.
The expected outcome is that the model sustains high classi-
ﬁcation performance while requiring fewer features, which
translates to reduced computational costs, faster training, and
decreased storage needs.
To enhance interpretability, SHAP and LIME Local
Explanations are applied to a randomly selected sample to
explain the model’s decision-making process. SHAP gener-
ates explanations by assigning Shapley values to features,
showing their contributions to speciﬁc predictions. LIME
complements this by creating local surrogate models to
approximate the decision boundaries of the original model
for the selected samples. The synergy between these methods
provides a comprehensive view of the feature contributions
to each decision.
The explanation consistency check is performed to ensure
alignment between SHAP and LIME outputs. This step val-
idates the reliability of the explanations and identiﬁes any
inconsistencies or potential biases in feature interpretation.
The insights from this process are fed back into the Fea-
ture Reassessment loop, where features are re-evaluated, and
potentially new features are identiﬁed, reﬁning the Feature
Reduction process for greater accuracy and efﬁciency.
This iterative process ensures that our framework adapts
dynamicallytothecharacteristicsofthedataset,continuously
improving both the model’s interpretability and prediction
performance. The second stage thus serves as the critical
link between feature reduction and real-time application,
ensuring that the IDS framework remains both efﬁcient and
reliable.
4 Performance evaluation
4.1 Datasets, ML model, and performance metrics
selection
For evaluating the proposed framework, we select the CIC-
DDoS2019 [41], CICIoT2023 [42], and 5G PFCP [43]
datasets, which together cover a broad spectrum of attack
trafﬁc and benign ﬂows across different networking environ-
ments. CIC-DDoS2019 provides representative volumetric
DDoS attacks (e.g., HTTP Flood, SYN Flood) that domi-
nate IP-based networks, CICIoT2023 reﬂects the complexity
of IoT-oriented threats, and 5G PFCP highlights emerging
control-plane vulnerabilities in mobile-core systems. Within
these datasets, we deliberately select a set of representa-
tive attacks, namely volumetric (HTTP, SYN), low-and-slow
(Slowloris), reconnaissance (Portmap), and 5G control-
plane (Session Deletion, Session Establishment), to capture
diverse trafﬁc characteristics and detection challenges. This
selection ensures coverage of both common and hard-to-
detect attack families, while keeping the evaluation tractable
and focused without compromising the generality of the con-
clusions. Table 3 shows that all three datasets have been
pre-processed to be class-balanced but vary in size and num-
ber of features. The Portmap set has 59 features for 8000
ﬂows, CICIoT2023 is much larger but reduces to 35 fea-
tures, and the 5G PFCP data has just 14 features. This
highlights the framework’s ability to handle different data
scales without being affected by class imbalance. Because
the balanced variants of CIC-DDoS2019 (Portmap), the three
CICIoT2023 ﬁles, and the two 5G PFCP corpora each con-
tain virtually equal numbers of benign and malicious ﬂows
(Table 3), class imbalance was not an issue. Consequently, no
resampling or cost-sensitive weighting was applied; instead,
all train/validation/test partitions are stratiﬁed to preserve the
1:1 class ratio.
Data preprocessing involves three main steps: removing 5-
tuple features, removing ﬂow-related features, and removing
constant features. The 5-tuple attributes (source IP, desti-
nation IP, source port, destination port, and protocol) are
removed because they are speciﬁc to individual connections.
These attributes might also introduce an unnecessary model
bias towards speciﬁc IP addresses or port numbers, which
could make the detection of general attack patterns more
difﬁcult. Flow-related features, such as ﬂow duration, are
excluded because they require waiting for the entire ﬂow to
be completed before being calculated. This step is important
for achieving real-time detection, where the IDS must pro-
cess trafﬁc as it arrives without waiting for ﬂow completion.
Constant features are removed because they do not provide
anyvariabilityorusefulinformationforthemodel’sdecision-
making process. Since constant features have the same value
across all samples, they do not help the model differentiate
between malicious and benign trafﬁc and can unneces-
sarily increase the number of features the model needs
to process, potentially leading to increased computational
costs without improving performance. After preprocessing,
the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset samples have 59 features, the
CICIoT2023 dataset samples have 36 features, and the 5G
Table 3 Summary of the
datasets
Dataset
Benign
Attack
Total
Features
CIC-DDoS2019 (Portmap)
4000
4000
8000
59
CICIoT2023 (3 variants)
60,000
60,000
120,000
35
5G PFCP (2 variants)
3103
3103
6206
14
123



===== PAGE 10 =====

1104
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
PFCP dataset samples have 9 features. All features are nor-
malizedusingtheMinMaxScaler toensureuniformity. While
the CIC-DDoS2019 and CICIoT2023 datasets are used for
evaluating the XGBoost model’s performance before and
after feature reduction, the 5G PFCP dataset is excluded from
thisstepduetoitssmallinitialfeaturesetsize.Instead,the5G
PFCP dataset is primarily used to evaluate our framework’s
ability to explain 5G control-plane attacks.
The XGBoost model [44] is chosen for the AI-based IDS
due to its efﬁciency, scalability, and ability to handle imbal-
anced training datasets, along with its reduced computation
resource requirements compared to deep learning models.
XGBoost’s advanced regularization minimizes overﬁtting,
and its gradient boosting framework handles large train-
ing datasets effectively. Compared to traditional machine
learning models such as Random Forests or Support Vec-
tor Machines (SVM), XGBoost requires lower training time
and provides better control through hyperparameter tuning.
While deep learning models like neural networks can achieve
high accuracy, they often require large amounts of training
data and computational resources. XGBoost offers a balance
by providing good detection performance with lower com-
putational overhead. For datasets like CIC-DDoS2019 and
CICIoT2023, this balance is crucial for achieving high per-
formance without excessive computational costs.
To optimize model performance and reduce the risk of
overﬁtting, we employed a hyperparameter tuning proce-
dure using GridSearchCV combined with 10-fold cross-
validation. This technique systematically evaluates all possi-
ble combinations from a predeﬁned parameter grid, selecting
the conﬁguration that yields the best cross-validation perfor-
mance on the training folds. The full set of candidate values
for each parameter is summarized in Table 4, with the ﬁnal
selected settings highlighted in bold. We tuned seven key
hyperparameters of the XGBoost classiﬁer. The number of
estimators (n_estimators) controls the total number of boost-
ing rounds, where a larger number can improve performance
but may lead to overﬁtting if not counterbalanced by regular-
ization. The learning_rate governs the contribution of each
tree; smaller values require more trees but tend to improve
Table 4 Parameter grid used for XGBoost hyperparameter tuning with
GridSearchCV
Parameter
Values
n_estimators
{100, 200, 300, 400}
learning_rate
{0.05, 0.10, 0.20}
max_depth
{3, 4, 5, 6}
gamma
{0, 0.5, 1}
reg_lambda
{0.5, 1, 1.5}
subsample
{0.6, 0.8, 1.0}
colsample_bytree
{0.6, 0.8, 1.0}
generalization. The max_depth deﬁnes the maximum depth
of each tree, impacting the model’s capacity to capture com-
plex patterns, i.e., higher values increase complexity but
may reduce interpretability. The gamma parameter imposes
a minimum loss reduction required to make a further split,
thereby acting as a pruning mechanism. Reg_lambda is the
L2 regularization term on leaf weights, which penalizes large
coefﬁcients to improve model robustness. Subsample con-
trols the proportion of training instances randomly sampled
for each boosting round, reducing variance and helping avoid
overﬁtting. Similarly, Colsample_bytree sets the fraction of
features used when building each tree, promoting diver-
sity among trees and lowering the chance of ﬁtting noise.
The bolded values in Table 4 indicate the optimal conﬁg-
uration selected by the grid search. These values reﬂect a
balancedtrade-offbetweendetectionperformanceandmodel
complexity, conﬁrmed by strong validation results across
all datasets. The use of 10-fold stratiﬁed cross-validation
ensured that the tuning process remained robust to class
imbalance and provided reliable estimates of generalization.
To compare the XGBoost model performance before and
after feature reduction, we use ﬁve metrics: Accuracy, Preci-
sion, Speciﬁcity, Recall, and F1 Score. These metrics allow
for a comprehensive evaluation of our approach’s effective-
ness beyond mere accuracy. For instance, Precision measures
the model’s ability to correctly identify malicious samples,
while Recall evaluates its capability to detect all malicious
samples. Speciﬁcity shows the model’s ability to avoid false
positives, and F1 Score provides a balance between Precision
and Recall.
4.2 Evaluation scenarios, results, and analysis
We evaluate our XAI-based IDS framework using one dataset
from CIC-DDoS2019 and three datasets from CICIoT2023,
each containing benign trafﬁc samples as well as malicious
trafﬁc samples of one of the following speciﬁc DDoS attack
types: Portmap, SYN Flood, HTTP Flood, and Slowloris.
These attacks are highly effective and represent both volu-
metric (e.g., Portmap, SYN Flood, HTTP Flood) and slow
(e.g., Slowloris) attack types, which pose signiﬁcant chal-
lenges for an IDS due to their differing trafﬁc patterns.
Additionally, we use the 5G PFCP dataset, which represents
control-plane attacks in 5G networks. It focuses on two spe-
ciﬁc attack types: PFCP Session Deletion and PFCP Session
Establishment. These attacks rely on signaling protocols and
packet-level manipulations rather than volumetric trafﬁc pat-
terns seen in data plane attacks. This results in a smaller
feature set, often limited to protocol-speciﬁc attributes like
session counters or message types, which can make it difﬁ-
cult to distinguish malicious activity from normal operations
[43].
123



===== PAGE 11 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1105
We compare the attack detection results obtained from
the ﬁrst stage of our framework (which utilizes all fea-
tures, i.e., 59 features for the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset and
36 features for the CICIoT2023 dataset) with those from
the second stage after the Feature Reduction. Note that the
5G PFCP dataset is not used for the model performance
comparison before and after the Feature Reduction due to
its small initial feature set size (9 features). Instead, it is
used to evaluate our framework’s capability to detect and
explain 5G-speciﬁc control-plane attacks using both global
andlocalexplanations.TheFeatureReductionprocess,based
on SHAP Global Explanation and statistical methods, selects
features that are both statistically signiﬁcant and practically
impactful,improvingtheframework’sefﬁciencywithoutsac-
riﬁcing prediction accuracy. To assess the effect of Feature
Reduction, we examine the XGBoost model performance
by applying the top 5, 10, 20, and 30 features. This evalua-
tion enables us to understand the trade-offs between reducing
computational overhead and maintaining high detection per-
formance, especially for datasets with a larger number of
initial features.
4.2.1 Results of SHAP global explanation, feature selection,
and feature reduction processes
Figures 2, 3, and 4 display the SHAP global summary
plots for the Portmap, SYN Flood, HTTP Flood, Slowloris,
PFCP Session Deletion, and PFCP Session Establishment
attacks, respectively, highlighting the most inﬂuential fea-
tures on model predictions. The Y-axis lists the features
in the order of their importance, while the X-axis, indi-
cating the SHAP values, shows each feature’s impact on
the model’s prediction. Positive SHAP values push pre-
dictions towards the malicious class, while negative values
push towards the benign class. The explanations for two dis-
tinct DDoS attack types: volumetric (Portmap, SYN Flood,
HTTP Flood) and slow (Slowloris) are investigated. For
the Portmap attack, the ‘Fwd Packet Length Min’
feature emerges as the most signiﬁcant. Lower values of
this feature, indicated by blue dots, signiﬁcantly decrease
the model’s output and push the prediction towards the
benign class. The ‘Inbound’ feature is the second most
important one, with higher values (red dots) generally push-
ing the prediction towards the malicious class. Similarly,
for the SYN Flood attack, ‘syn_flag_number’ and
‘Number’ emerge as the most signiﬁcant features, with
high values of these features strongly indicating SYN Flood
attack samples. The ‘Header_Length’ feature is the
next most important one, where lower values are indica-
tive of SYN Flood attacks. For the HTTP Flood attack, the
‘Number’ feature, representing the number of packets in
a ﬂow, is the most inﬂuential one. The ‘fin_count’ fea-
ture, which counts packets with the FIN ﬂag set, also plays a
crucial role. Higher values tend to push predictions towards
Fig. 2 SHAP global explanation results for Portmap and SYN Flood attacks
123



===== PAGE 12 =====

1106
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Fig. 3 SHAP global explanation results for HTTP Flood and Slowloris attacks
the malicious class. Similarly, in the case of Slowloris, the
‘Number’ feature remains the most important one. Higher
values signiﬁcantly increase the model’s output, driving pre-
dictions towards the malicious class. The ‘IAT’ feature,
representing the packet inter-arrival time, is also highly
inﬂuential, with lower values pushing predictions towards a
malicious outcome. In the case of 5G control-plane attacks,
the framework demonstrates its capability to identify control-
plane attack-speciﬁc features. For the PFCP Session Deletion
attack, ‘PFCPHeartbeatRequest_counter’ is the
most influential feature. Low values of ‘PFCPHeartbeat
Request_counter’ are indicative of malicious samples,
highlighting the role of this feature in identifying abnor-
malities in PFCP Heartbeat requests. Similarly, for the PFCP
SessionEstablishment attack, ‘PFCPSessionEstablish
mentRequest_counter’ emerges as the most crucial
feature, with low values strongly linked to predictions of
malicious trafﬁc. These results show the importance of
control-plane-speciﬁc features in detecting such threats.
To complement the results of the SHAP Global Expla-
nation, we utilize the ANOVA feature selection method,
which identiﬁes statistically signiﬁcant features by analyz-
ing the variance between classes. ANOVA, or Analysis of
Variance, evaluates the degree to which individual features
Fig. 4 SHAP global explanation results for PFCP attacks
123



===== PAGE 13 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1107
contribute to class separation by comparing the variance
within classes (e.g., benign or malicious trafﬁc) to the vari-
ance between classes. Features with a higher between-class
variance than within-class variance are considered statis-
tically signiﬁcant, making them crucial for distinguishing
between malicious and benign trafﬁc. ANOVA is particularly
advantageous due to its simplicity, efﬁciency, and ability to
handle large datasets. Unlike more complex feature selection
techniques, such as Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE),
Mutual Information (MI), or Wrapper Methods, ANOVA
does not rely on model-speciﬁc parameters and offers a
purely statistical perspective, making it a robust complement
to model-based interpretability tools like SHAP. By combin-
ing the outcomes of SHAP Global Explanation and ANOVA,
we achieve a more comprehensive selection of features,
integrating SHAP’s interpretability with ANOVA’s statisti-
cal precision. The Feature Reduction process merges these
results, assigning a 60% weight to SHAP Global Explanation
and 40% to ANOVA, prioritizing SHAP’s ability to capture
feature importance in the context of model predictions while
incorporating the statistical insights from ANOVA. Table 5
presents the top 30 features for the CICIoT2023 and CIC-
DDoS2019 datasets, and Table 6 lists the 9 features for the
5G PFCP datasets. These identiﬁed features align well with
the nature of each attack. For instance, in volumetric attacks,
which rely on generating a high rate of trafﬁc to overwhelm
the target, trafﬁc volume-related features such as ‘Number’
are among the most important. On the other hand, for the
Slowloris attack, ‘HTTP’ is a key feature, surpassed only by
the ‘Number’ feature, as this attack relies on slowly send-
ing incomplete HTTP requests to keep connections open.
These tables represent the ﬁnal results of the ﬁrst stage and
serve as the input for further analysis and evaluation in the
second stage of our framework.
Table 5 Most important
features as identiﬁed in the ﬁrst
stage
Portmap
SYN Flood
HTTP Flood
Slowloris
Fwd Packet Length Min
syn_ﬂag_number
Number
Number
Min Packet Length
Number
HTTP
HTTP
Inbound
rst_count
urg_count
syn_count
Avg Fwd Segment Size
IAT
HTTPS
IAT
Fwd Packet Length Mean
Weight
rst_count
rst_count
URG Flag Count
Magnitude
Duration
Tot sum
Average Packet Size
Header_Length
syn_count
Header_Length
Fwd Packets/s
Variance
ack_count
Variance
Fwd Header Length
Min
ﬁn_count
Duration
Fwd IAT Total
ack_ﬂag_number
Header_Length
HTTPS
Packet Length Mean
ﬁn_count
Magnitude
ﬁn_count
Packet Length Std
urg_count
Rate
rst_ﬂag_number
Fwd IAT Std
Tot sum
AVG
Tot size
Down/Up Ratio
ack_count
Tot size
psh_ﬂag_number
Bwd IAT Mean
HTTPS
Std
AVG
Init_Win_bytes_forward
Duration
Radius
urg_count
Fwd IAT Min
syn_count
Max
Magnitude
Total Length of Fwd Packets
Std
Tot sum
ack_count
Total Length of Bwd Packets
Radius
Variance
Rate
Init_Win_bytes_backward
Covariance
Min
Max
Bwd Packet Length Min
AVG
syn_ﬂag_number
Std
Bwd IAT Min
Tot size
IAT
Min
CWE Flag Count
Max
TCP
Radius
ACK Flag Count
rst_ﬂag_number
Covariance
Srate
Bwd Packet Length Mean
UDP
rst_ﬂag_number
ﬁn_ﬂag_number
Avg Bwd Segment Size
TCP
UDP
Covariance
Bwd IAT Total
HTTP
Weight
TCP
Bwd IAT Std
psh_ﬂag_number
psh_ﬂag_number
ack_ﬂag_number
Bwd Packet Length Max
Rate
Srate
UDP
Fwd PSH Flags
DNS
ﬁn_ﬂag_number
DNS
123



===== PAGE 14 =====

1108
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Table 6 Most important features as identiﬁed in the ﬁrst stage (continued)
PFCP Session Deletion
PFCP Session Establishment
fwd_packets
PFCPSessionEstablishmentRequest_counter
PFCPSessionModiﬁcationRequest_counter
PFCPSessionEstablishmentResponse_counter
PFCPSessionModiﬁcationResponse_counter
PFCPHeartbeatRequest_counter
PFCPHeartbeatRequest_counter
PFCPHeartbeatResponse_counter
bwd_packets
fwd_packets
PFCPSessionDeletionResponse_counter
bwd_packets
PFCPHeartbeatResponse_counter
PFCPSessionModiﬁcationRequest_counter
PFCPSessionEstablishmentRequest_counter
PFCPSessionModiﬁcationResponse_counter
PFCPSessionEstablishmentResponse_counter
PFCPSessionDeletionResponse_counter
Table 7 Performance metric
comparison for Portmap
Accuracy
Precision
Speciﬁcity
Recall
F1 Score
All Features
99.813%
99.874%
99.876%
99.749%
99.811%
Top 5
81.063%
77.666%
75.249%
86.935%
82.039%
Top 10
98.125%
97.875%
97.886%
98.367%
98.120%
Top 20
98.500%
98.371%
98.383%
98.618%
98.494%
Top 30
98.875%
98.869%
98.881%
98.869%
98.869%
Table 8 Performance metric
comparison for SYN Flood
Accuracy
Precision
Speciﬁcity
Recall
F1 Score
All Features
99.988%
100.000%
100.000%
99.975%
99.988%
Top 5
96.438%
96.207%
96.114%
96.755%
96.480%
Top 10
99.250%
99.135%
99.117%
99.381%
99.258%
Top 20
99.788%
99.777%
99.773%
99.802%
99.789%
Top 30
99.950%
99.950%
99.950%
99.950%
99.950%
Table 9 Performance metric
comparison for HTTP Flood
Accuracy
Precision
Speciﬁcity
Recall
F1 Score
All Features
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
100.000%
Top 5
96.281%
96.258%
96.035%
96.514%
96.386%
Top 10
99.513%
99.633%
99.616%
99.413%
99.523%
Top 20
99.688%
99.731%
99.719%
99.658%
99.694%
Top 30
99.888%
99.878%
99.872%
99.902%
99.890%
Table 10 Performance metric
comparison for Slowloris
Accuracy
Precision
Speciﬁcity
Recall
F1 Score
All Features
99.988%
100.000%
100.000%
99.975%
99.987%
Top 5
97.013%
98.077%
98.130%
95.890%
96.971%
Top 10
99.013%
99.121%
99.127%
98.897%
99.009%
Top 20
99.725%
99.724%
99.726%
99.724%
99.724%
Top 30
99.925%
99.925%
99.925%
99.925%
99.925%
123



===== PAGE 15 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1109
4.2.2 Performance metrics comparison: Before vs after
feature reduction
Tables 7, 8, 9, and 10 give a detailed comparison of the per-
formance metrics of the XGBoost model in the ﬁrst stage
(all features) and the second stage (after feature reduction)
for the CIC-DDoS2019 and CICIoT2023 datasets, thereby
quantifying the impact of feature reduction on detection qual-
ity. Figure5 complements these tables by visualizing how
AccuracyandF1evolvewith K ∈{5, 10, 20, 30, all}:perfor-
mance remains ﬂat from “All Features” down to the Top-10
set and degrades noticeably only at Top-5, conﬁrming that
ten features constitute a robust operating point. Across the
ten stratiﬁed cross-validation folds, the average absolute gap
between validation and test accuracies is below 0.10 percent-
age points for every attack class (Portmap: 0.09 pp, SYN
Flood: 0.02 pp, HTTP Flood: 0.01 pp, Slowloris: 0.03 pp;
standard deviations range from 0.01 pp to 0.13 pp). The aver-
age absolute gap between validation and test accuracies is
deﬁned as the mean of
Accval,i −Acctest,i
 × 100% over
all ten folds, i.e. the percentage-point difference between the
accuracy measured on the inner validation subset and that
on the corresponding held-out test subset, so smaller gaps
Table
11 Confusion matrix - Portmap (Top-10 features, CIC-
DDoS2019)
Pred. Neg.
Pred. Pos.
Actual Neg.
787 (TN)
17 (FP)
Actual Pos.
13 (FN)
783 (TP)
indicate closer agreement and stronger generalization. These
results conﬁrm that the model generalizes extremely well and
that the metrics reported in the tables are reliable.
For the Portmap attack, retaining the top 10 features sus-
tains a high accuracy of 98.125% and precision of 97.875%;
a further reduction to 5 features causes a marked decline
(81.063% accuracy, 77.666% precision), indicating loss of
critical information.
For SYN Flood, performance remains strong with 10
features(99.250%accuracy,99.381%recall),whereasreduc-
ing to 5 features lowers accuracy to 96.438% and recall to
96.755%. A similar trend is observed for HTTP Flood: accu-
racy stays above 99.513% with 10 features but recall and F1
Score fall to 96.514% and 96.386% with 5 features.
Fig. 5 Performance trends across feature sets
123



===== PAGE 16 =====

1110
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Slowloris detection remains excellent with 20 features;
trimming to 10 features causes a slight dip (99.013% accu-
racy, 99.121% precision), and to 5 features lowers recall
and F1 Score to 95.890% and 96.971%, respectively, reﬂect-
ing the subtler trafﬁc signatures of slow-rate attacks. The
confusion-matrix tables (Tables 11, 12, 13, and 14) show the
detection performance of the best Top-10 feature conﬁgura-
tions.
Table 15 complements the XGBoost results in Table9 with
two classical baselines. Random Forest attains virtually per-
fect metrics under both feature settings (only a 0.0001 loss
in F1 Score when the dimensionality is reduced), which is
expected because bootstrap aggregation and per-split feature
subsamplingalreadymitigatetheimpactofredundantpredic-
tors. Linear SVM, on the other hand, scores markedly lower
when trained on all features (F1 Score to be around 79%) but
risesto94%aftertheTop-10reduction;eliminatingirrelevant
or weakly informative dimensions increases the margin sepa-
rabilityoftheclassesandtherebyimprovesitsgeneralization.
The combined evidence indicates that the ANOVA+SHAP
ﬁlter retains the discriminative power needed for high detec-
tion accuracy while simplifying the input space—beneﬁting
margin-based learners such as SVM—whereas our two-stage
XGBoost pipeline preserves Random Forest-level perfor-
mance and, as shown in Sect.4.2.4, yields the fastest and
most reliable local explanations.
The feature reduction process is crucial for balancing
performance and efﬁciency, ensuring that the proposed
framework remains scalable while preserving its detection
capabilities. In the subsequent sections, we explore how this
reduction affects explanation generation time, investigating
its role in enhancing the practical applicability of the frame-
work.
4.2.3 SHAP and LIME local explanations
The results of the SHAP Local Explanations are visualized in
the force plots, which illustrate how individual features con-
tribute to the XGBoost model’s speciﬁc prediction. As shown
in Figs.6, 7, and 8, the plots begin at a base value that repre-
sents the average prediction result across all samples of the
respective dataset, denoted by a gray vertical line. Features
that push the prediction higher (indicating malicious trafﬁc)
are marked in red, while those that push it lower (indicating
benign trafﬁc) are marked in blue. The bar lengths corre-
Table 12 Confusion matrix - SYN Flood (Top-10 features)
Pred. Neg.
Pred. Pos.
Actual Neg.
3,928 (TN)
35 (FP)
Actual Pos.
25 (FN)
4,012 (TP)
Table 13 Confusion matrix - HTTP Flood (Top-10 features)
Pred. Neg.
Pred. Pos.
Actual Neg.
3,894 (TN)
15 (FP)
Actual Pos.
24 (FN)
4,067 (TP)
spond to the magnitude of each feature’s impact. The ﬁnal
prediction is computed by adding these contributions to the
base value.
As an example, ﬁrst we examine the SHAP force plots
for SYN Flood and Slowloris attack samples, depicted in
Figs.6 to 7. In the SYN Flood plot, the base value starts at
3.36, reﬂecting the model’s initial prediction before incor-
porating feature contributions. The ﬁnal output value of
15.64 is achieved primarily due to the substantial contri-
butions of features such as ‘syn_flag_number’ and
‘Number’, which strongly push the prediction toward
the malicious class. Similarly, in the Slowloris plot, the
base value starts at −0.06675, indicating a baseline heav-
ily leaning towards a benign outcome. The ﬁnal output
value increases sharply to 9.94, primarily driven by the
‘Number’ and ‘fin_count’ features, which have sig-
niﬁcant positive contributions towards the malicious class.
This pattern underscores the model’s capability to identify
slow DDoS attacks like Slowloris that rely on speciﬁc trafﬁc
patterns. Although less prominent in the plot, features such
as ‘syn_count’ and ‘IAT’ also exhibit small positive
SHAP values, contributing to the overall prediction.
Second,weobservetheSHAPforceplotsforthe5GPFCP
attack samples, depicted in Fig.8. For the PFCP Session
Deletion attack, the base value starts at 0.1034 and rises to
7.87,primarilydrivenbythefeatures‘fwd_packets’and
‘PFCPHeartbeatRequest_counter’. Similarly, for
the PFCP Session Establishment attack, the base value
starts at −0.0606 and increases to 2.38, with signiﬁcant
contributions from the ‘PFCPSessionEstablishment
Request_counter’ feature.
Next, we consider the LIME feature importance plots
shown in Figs.9, 10, and 11, which illustrate how individual
features inﬂuence speciﬁc predictions made by the XGBoost
model. The prediction probabilities for the negative (benign)
and positive (malicious) classes are displayed at the top left
of each plot, providing insight into the model’s conﬁdence in
its prediction. The features are listed alongside their values,
and their contributions are visually represented in orange or
Table 14 Confusion matrix - Slowloris (Top-10 features)
Pred. Neg.
Pred. Pos.
Actual Neg.
3,975 (TN)
35 (FP)
Actual Pos.
44 (FN)
3,946 (TP)
123



===== PAGE 17 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1111
Table 15 Classical-ML baselines on HTTP Flood trafﬁc: full feature
set vs. Top-10 ANOVA+SHAP features
Model
Feature set
Accuracy
Recall
F1
Random Forest
All Features
0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
Random Forest
Top 10
0.9998
0.9995
0.9998
[2pt] Linear SVM
All Features
0.7833
0.7952
0.7896
Linear SVM
Top 10
0.9329
0.9768
0.9370
blue bars. Orange indicates features pushing the prediction
towards the malicious class, while blue represents features
driving the prediction towards the benign class. The length
of each bar corresponds to the magnitude of the feature’s
contribution, with longer bars indicating a larger impact on
the prediction outcome.
For the SYN Flood attack, the LIME plot identiﬁes the
feature ‘Number’ with a value of 9.50 as the primary
contributor to the malicious prediction, accounting for a
signiﬁcant portion of the probability (0.95). Additional fea-
tures such as ‘psh_flag_number’ and ‘ack_count’
also contribute to the malicious classiﬁcation, reinforcing
the prediction. In contrast, features such as ‘DNS’ and
‘urg_count’ push the prediction towards the benign class
but have a smaller overall inﬂuence.
For the Slowloris attack, the feature ‘Number’ again
turns out to be most signiﬁcant, followed by the fea-
tures ‘fin_count’, ‘DNS’, and ‘syn_count’. These
features contribute predominantly to the malicious class,
emphasizing the model’s reliance on trafﬁc volume and ﬂag-
related features to detect Slowloris behavior effectively. Fea-
tures such as ‘IAT’ and ‘ack_flag_number’ exhibit
smaller contributions, which aligns with the subtle nature of
Slowloris trafﬁc patterns.
For the 5G PFCP attacks, the LIME plots provide valuable
insights into the control-plane trafﬁc features that inﬂuence
the predictions. For the PFCP Session Deletion attack, fea-
tures such as ‘fwd_packets’ and ‘PFCPHeartbeat
Request_counter’ are signiﬁcant contributors to the
malicious classiﬁcation. The feature ‘fwd_packets’
with a high value (506) pushes strongly towards the mali-
cious class, while the feature ‘PFCPHeartbeatRequest
_counter’ also plays an important role in the decision-
makingprocess. Similarly, for thePFCPSessionEstablishment
attack, the features ‘PFCPSessionEstablishment
Request_counter’ and ‘fwd_packets’ dominate
the prediction. In particular, the feature ‘PFCPSession
EstablishmentRequest_counter’ with a low value
(0.00) strongly pushes the prediction towards the malicious
class.
Our framework includes an explanation consistency check
process to ensure the alignment of insights gained from
SHAP and LIME local explanations, which enhances the
reliability and trustworthiness of the model’s interpretations.
By comparing the explanations generated by both methods
on the same sample, we can identify consistencies and dis-
crepancies in feature importance, which helps to validate
the model’s decisions. This cross-veriﬁcation is particularly
valuable in scenarios where interpretability and accountabil-
ity are critical, such as in detecting complex attack patterns.
For example, in the case of a sample of a SYN Flood
attack, both SHAP and LIME consistently identiﬁed the
‘Number’ feature as the most inﬂuential factor driving
the prediction toward the malicious class. This consistency
underscores the robustness of the framework’s ability to
detect SYN Flood attacks with high conﬁdence. However,
discrepancies are also observed: For example, SHAP identi-
ﬁedthefeatures‘IAT’and ‘Header_Length’ascrucial
in pushing the prediction towards the malicious outcome,
whereas these features are less emphasized by LIME. Con-
versely, LIME, contrary to SHAP, emphasizes the feature
‘psh_flag_number’ as an important contributor. These
differences likely arise due to the inherent methodological
variations in how SHAP and LIME generate explanations.
SHAP considers all possible feature interactions in its game-
theoretic approach, while LIME relies on perturbations and
surrogate models to approximate feature inﬂuence locally.
Understanding these methodological differences can help to
reﬁne the feature selection process and to improve the model
interpretability further.
For a sample of a Slowloris attack, both SHAP and
LIME consistently identiﬁed the features ‘Number’ and
‘fin_count’ as signiﬁcant contributors to the positive
classiﬁcation, conﬁrming their importance. This consistency
indicates that both methods effectively capture the crucial
Fig. 6 SHAP local explanation results for Portmap and SYN Flood attacks
123



===== PAGE 18 =====

1112
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Fig. 7 SHAP local explanation results for HTTP Flood and Slowloris attacks
Fig. 8 SHAP local explanation results for PFCP Session Deletion and Session Establisment attacks
Fig. 9 LIME local explanation results for Portmap and SYN Flood attacks
123



===== PAGE 19 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1113
Fig. 10 LIME local explanation results for HTTP Flood and Slowloris attacks
features needed to detect slow DDoS attacks. Nonetheless,
minor discrepancies were observed in the ranking and mag-
nitude of other features, e.g., ‘syn_count’ and ‘DNS’,
which appeared more prominently in LIME compared to
SHAP. These variations might reﬂect differences in how
each method prioritizes subtle feature contributions in low-
intensity attack trafﬁc scenarios like Slowloris attacks.
These differences indicate areas where further analysis or
a feature reassessment might be required to enhance the inter-
pretability and ensure the robustness of the detection model.
This might involve analyzing the feature impact for differ-
ent samples, exploring feature engineering techniques, and
adjusting the model hyperparameters. For instance, features
that show a consistent importance for attack detection in both
methodscouldbefurthervalidatedbyusingdifferentsamples
that are classiﬁed as malicious (by XGBoost) to assess their
generalizability. Similarly, discrepancies between SHAP and
LIME could indicate opportunities to improve feature selec-
tion or to reﬁne the hyperparameters in the training process.
With this iterative process, it is ensured that the most
signiﬁcant features are retained, enhancing the overall IDS
detection performance and interpretability. Furthermore,
incorporating additional consistency checks for different
attack types and networking environments, such as IoT or
5G, could further solidify the framework’s reliability. This
approach not only strengthens trust in the IDS’s decision-
making but also supports its adaptability to evolving cyber
threats.
4.2.4 Efﬁciency of the local explanations
In this subsection, we evaluate the efﬁciency of SHAP and
LIME local explanations by comparing their execution times
for two scenarios: using all features and using the reduced
feature set obtained through the ﬁrst stage of our frame-
work. All experiments were conducted on a workstation
with an AMD Ryzen 7 3800X 8-core CPU, 32 GB RAM,
and an NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU (12 GB VRAM). For
LIME, we used a single CPU core with 5000 perturba-
tions per instance to provide consistent timing comparisons.
While the reported measurements reﬂect this speciﬁc hard-
wareconﬁguration,theframework’sdesign—particularlythe
dimensionality reduction stage and the use of a lightweight
XGBoost model—ensures that detection accuracy is pre-
served even on lower-speciﬁcation systems. The primary
difference in such environments would be in explanation gen-
eration time, especially for LIME, which is more sensitive to
CPU performance than SHAP’s TreeExplainer.
123



===== PAGE 20 =====

1114
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Fig. 11 LIME local explanation
results for PFCP Session
Deletion and Session
Establishment attacks
The results are illustrated in Fig. 12.
As observed, SHAP Local Explanation demonstrates con-
sistently high efﬁciency across all datasets, with execution
times remaining low, ranging between 0.02 and 0.08s, irre-
spective of the number of features. This efﬁciency makes
SHAP particularly suitable for real-time IDS applications
where rapid insights are important.
In contrast, LIME Local Explanation shows a signiﬁcant
dependency on the number of features—the execution times
dramatically decrease when the feature set is reduced. For
instance, in the case of the SYN Flood, the execution time
drops from 36.38s when using all features to 9.48s with 10
features, representing a 74% time reduction. Further reduc-
ing the feature set to 5 features decreases the execution time
to 4.85s, achieving an 87% speed-up compared to using all
features. A similar behavior is observed for other attack traf-
ﬁc datasets, showing the substantial improvement in LIME’s
efﬁciency brought about by feature reduction. However, as
demonstrated in Sect.4.2.2, a reduction to only 5 features
leads to a signiﬁcant reduction in detection performance. The
10-feature set turns out to be the optimal choice as it strikes
a balance between speed and accuracy, which is essential for
real-time IDS applications where both computational efﬁ-
ciency and prediction quality are crucial.
For the next evaluation, we combined our proposed two-
stagemethodwiththeattentionweights-basedapproachfrom
Santhiappan et al. [33], originally designed for text data using
the CAML architecture to enhance LIME’s efﬁciency by
emphasizing relevant features. We adapted their method to
tabular datasets (CIC-DDoS2019 and CICIoT2023) by uti-
lizing the TabNet architecture [45], a deep learning model
speciﬁcally designed for tabular data instead of the CAML
architecture. TabNet incorporates a sparse attention mech-
anism that dynamically selects the most relevant features
for each instance, mimicking decision tree-like interpretabil-
ity while leveraging the ﬂexibility and power of neural
123



===== PAGE 21 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1115
Fig. 12 Execution time for the
SHAP and LIME local
explanations with XGBoost
model
networks. Its Feature Transformer processes input features
to capture complex relationships, while the iterative deci-
sion steps reﬁne the predictions by progressively building
hierarchical feature representations. We ﬁne-tuned the hyper-
parameters of the TabNet architecture using GridSearchCV.
Theresultingconﬁgurationisasfollows:themodeluseseight
decisiondimensions(n_d=8)andeightattentiondimensions
(n_a=8), with three decision steps (n_steps=3) to itera-
tively reﬁne feature importance and predictions. The learning
rate (lr=0.02) ensures steady optimization, and batch pro-
cessing is optimized with a batch size of 512 and a virtual
batch size of 128 to balance memory efﬁciency and training
speed. These parameters, combined with the sparse attention
mechanism, allow TabNet to dynamically focus on signiﬁ-
cant features in the datasets.
Furthermore, we exchanged the XGBoost model in our
framework by the method proposed by Santhiappan et al.
[33], which employs the Convolutional Attention for Multi-
Label classiﬁcation (CAML) model, an attention weight-
based model designed for text data. Their method enhances
LIME’s efﬁciency by using attention weights derived from
CAML to focus on the most relevant features. This approach
reduces the number of features that LIME needs to examine,
thereby accelerating the explanation generation time. Since
123



===== PAGE 22 =====

1116
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
Fig. 13 Execution time for
LIME local explanations with
TabNet model
CAML is unsuitable for tabular datasets and XGBoost is
not an attention weights-based model, we replaced CAML
with TabNet [45], which is a deep learning model speciﬁ-
cally designed for tabular data and is also equipped with an
attention mechanism. TabNet uses a sparse attention mech-
anism that dynamically selects the most relevant features
for each sample during training. The attention-based Feature
Transformer focuses on important features and learns their
signiﬁcance. Through an iterative process, TabNet reﬁnes its
predictionsstepbystep,witheachstepbuildingontheknowl-
edgegainedfromearlierstepstoimproveitsunderstandingof
the data. We ﬁne-tuned the hyperparameters of the TabNet
architecture using GridSearchCV. The resulting conﬁgura-
tion is as follows: the model uses eight decision dimensions
(n_d=8)andeightattentiondimensions(n_a=8),withthree
decision steps (n_steps=3) to iteratively reﬁne feature
importance and predictions. The learning rate (lr=0.02)
ensures steady optimization, and batch processing is opti-
mized with a batch size of 512 and a virtual batch size of
128 to balance memory efﬁciency and training speed. These
parameters, combined with the sparse attention mechanism,
allow TabNet to dynamically focus on signiﬁcant features in
the datasets.
We conducted experiments on CIC-DDoS2019 and
CICIoT2023 datasets, and analyzed the explanation gener-
ation time, focusing on the impact of feature reduction. As
shown in Fig.13, the explanation generation time decreases
signiﬁcantly when fewer features are used. For instance, in
the SYN Flood dataset, the time dropped from 48.13 to
15.43s when using 10 features, and for Portmap, it decreased
from 15.77 to 6.14s. These results conﬁrm that the Feature
Reduction process introduced in our framework improves
the efﬁciency of LIME’s explanation generation when paired
with attention-weight-based models like TabNet. In addition,
we observe that using XGBoost achieves faster explanation
generation times, as TabNet’s attention mechanism intro-
duces additional computational complexity. The codes and
datasets utilized in this study are publicly available online1
to facilitate full reproducibility.
4.2.5 Ablation study
Table 16 shows the ablation results for Portmap trafﬁc, where
both SHAP-only and ANOVA+SHAP fusion maintain per-
fect alignment with the full-feature baseline (F1 = 0.9994).
ANOVA-only selection, however, causes a noticeable decline
(F1 = 0.9981), indicating that purely statistical ﬁltering may
miss interaction effects critical to Portmap classiﬁcation.
Fromanefﬁciencyperspective,SHAP-onlyachievesthelow-
estLIMEtime(1.85s),whilethecombinedvariantretainsthe
same detection quality with only a marginal increase (2.29
s), suggesting that fusion preserves interpretability without
introducing overhead.
For SYN Flood (Table 17), all models achieve near-
identical performance to the full-feature baseline (F1 =
0.9999), conﬁrming the separability of this attack class.
ANOVA-only again exhibits a minor drop (F1 = 0.9990), but
it reduces LIME explanation time to 1.90 s, while SHAP-
only requires 2.18 s. The ANOVA+SHAP fusion offers a
balanced compromise (2.29 s), maintaining perfect accuracy
while trimming redundant features.
The HTTP Flood subset (Table 18) further illustrates these
trends. Both SHAP-only and ANOVA+SHAP achieve per-
fect scores, while ANOVA-only shows a small reduction (F1
1 https://github.com/DLTeamTUC/XAI-IDS
123



===== PAGE 23 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1117
Table 16 Ablation study on
Portmap trafﬁc. Top-10 variants
are obtained with (i) ANOVA
only, (ii) SHAP only, and (iii)
the proposed ANOVA+SHAP
fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
0.9994
0.9987
0.9994
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.9981
0.9962
0.9981
2.32
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
0.9994
0.9987
0.9994
1.85
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
0.9994
0.9987
0.9994
2.29
Table 17 Ablation study on
SYN Flood trafﬁc. Top-10
variants are obtained with (i)
ANOVA only, (ii) SHAP only,
and (iii) the proposed
ANOVA+SHAP fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.9990
0.9980
0.9990
1.90
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
2.18
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
2.29
Table 18 Ablation study on
HTTP Flood trafﬁc. Top-10
variants are obtained with (i)
ANOVA only, (ii) SHAP only,
and (iii) the proposed
ANOVA+SHAP fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.9969
0.9952
0.9969
2.33
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
2.30
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
2.16
Table 19 Ablation study on
Slowloris trafﬁc. Top-10
variants are obtained with (i)
ANOVA only, (ii) SHAP only,
and (iii) the proposed
ANOVA+SHAP fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
0.9998
0.9995
0.9997
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.9839
0.9778
0.9838
2.40
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
0.9999
0.9997
0.9999
2.57
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
0.9998
0.9995
0.9997
2.44
Table 20 Ablation study on
PFCP Session Deletion trafﬁc.
Top-10 variants are obtained
with (i) ANOVA only, (ii) SHAP
only, and (iii) the proposed
ANOVA+SHAP fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
0.8760
0.7492
0.8566
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.8631
0.7262
0.8414
1.55
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
0.8760
0.7492
0.8566
1.46
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
0.8760
0.7492
0.8566
1.45
Table 21 Ablation study on
PFCP Session Establishment
trafﬁc. Top-10 variants are
obtained with (i) ANOVA only,
(ii) SHAP only, and (iii) the
proposed ANOVA+SHAP
fusion
Variant
Accuracy
Recall
F1
LIME time (s)
XGBoost (All features)
0.9911
1.0000
0.9911
–
[2pt] XGBoost + ANOVA Top-10
0.9952
1.0000
0.9952
1.83
XGBoost + SHAP Top-10
0.9911
1.0000
0.9911
1.76
XGBoost + ANOVA+SHAP Top-10
0.9911
1.0000
0.9911
1.80
123



===== PAGE 24 =====

1118
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
= 0.9969). Here, the fusion variant provides slightly faster
explanations (2.16 s vs. 2.30–2.33 s), highlighting that com-
bining statistical ﬁltering with model-driven importance can
yield efﬁciency gains without impairing quality.
Slowloris(Table19)presentsthemostchallengingcase,as
ANOVA-only reduces performance more substantially (F1 =
0.9838). By contrast, SHAP-only and ANOVA+SHAP both
sustain nearly perfect detection (F1 = 0.9999 and 0.9997,
respectively). The fusion variant shortens LIME explana-
tion time (2.44 s) compared to SHAP-only (2.57 s), again
demonstrating that combining ANOVA with SHAP helps
remove redundant features, stabilizing interpretability efﬁ-
ciency while preserving accuracy.
Turningto5Gtraffic,theSessionDeletionattack(Table20)
proves especially difﬁcult to classify, as the overall base-
line accuracy is lower (F1 = 0.8566). Here, SHAP-only
and ANOVA+SHAP fusion replicate the full-feature perfor-
mance, while ANOVA-only reduces F1 to 0.8414. Efﬁciency
gains are also observed, as explanation times drop from
1.76 s (baseline equivalent) to 1.45–1.55 s. In contrast, Ses-
sion Establishment (Table 21) achieves consistently strong
performance, with ANOVA-only slightly boosting the F1
Score (0.9952) compared to the baseline (0.9911), while
SHAP-only and ANOVA+SHAP fusion maintain parity.
Explanation times remain efﬁcient (1.76–1.83 s), conﬁrm-
ing that the fusion approach does not introduce overhead and
is effective even under 5G control-plane trafﬁc.
In summary, across all six attack types, ANOVA-only
consistently risks measurable accuracy losses, particularly
in more complex trafﬁc such as Slowloris and PFCP Ses-
sion Deletion. By contrast, SHAP-only and the proposed
ANOVA+SHAP fusion consistently match or exceed the
baseline detection quality, with the fusion variant providing
modest but consistent gains in explanation efﬁciency. These
ﬁndings conﬁrm that combining statistical ﬁltering with
model-driven importance yields the best balance between
accuracy and interpretability efﬁciency across diverse net-
working environments.
5 Conclusion
This paper introduces an efﬁcient and explainable XAI-based
IDS framework that mitigates the “black-box” limitations of
conventional AI-IDS by integrating statistical feature selec-
tion (ANOVA) with SHAP and LIME, thereby enhancing
interpretability while preserving high detection performance
and computational efﬁciency. The two-stage method not
only reduces the feature space by ≈70% but also enforces
consistency between SHAP and LIME local explanations,
validating the reliability of the interpretations. A comprehen-
sive evaluation on the CIC-DDoS2019, CICIoT2023, and 5G
PFCP datasets demonstrates robust attack-detection capa-
bility across diverse networking environments and attack
scenarios: the framework maintains an F1 Score ≥99% and
accelerates LIME explanation generation by up to 87 % with
the reduced feature set. Although a full head-to-head bench-
mark with the latest deep learning IDSs (e.g., DeepIDS and
SAIDD) is left for future work, their published detection
performance results are already matched or exceeded by our
lightweight XGBoost pipeline.
In future work, we will strengthen resilience to noisy
data by integrating noise-robust preprocessing (e.g., Isola-
tion Forest for outlier removal, Hampel and median ﬁltering
for bursty artefacts, and RobustScaler to temper heavy-tailed
feature distributions) and by injecting controlled Gaussian
and burst noise during training for data-level augmenta-
tion. To counter adversarial manipulation, we will extend
the training loop with Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) adversarial examples,
followed by adversarial re-training and a lightweight detector
based on Mahalanobis distance to ﬂag perturbed ﬂows at run-
time. We also plan to develop a real-time online version and
explore federated deployment for privacy-preserving scala-
bility, while adding a packet-level module that leverages 1-D
CNN embeddings so that raw packet traces can be processed
alongside ﬂow features.
Author contributions BN organized the paper’s structure, formulated
the state-of-the-art, deﬁned the goals, and designed the experiments. BN
and AVJ collaborated on formulating the framework, with TB review-
ing and ﬁnalizing it. AVJ conducted the initial experiments using the
CIC-DDoS2019 dataset, which were later expanded by BN to include
the CICIoT 2023 and 5G PFCP datasets. All authors reviewed the
manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL. This work has been performed in the framework of the
RADARS project, funded by the German BSI (ID: 01MO24004B)
and the SUSTAINET-Advance project, funded by the German BMFTR
(ID:16KIS2280).
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the
current study.
Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
123



===== PAGE 25 =====

Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1119
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Arrieta AB et al (2020) Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI):
concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward respon-
sible AI. Information Fusion 58:82–115
2. Castelvecchi D (2016) Can we open the black box of AI? Nature
538(7623):20
3. Lundberg SM, Lee S-I (2017) A uniﬁed approach to interpret-
ing model predictions. In: Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 4768–4777
4. Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2016) ’Why should I trust you?’:
explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In: Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pp. 1135–1144
5. Neupane S et al (2022) Explainable intrusion detection systems
(x-ids): a survey of current methods, challenges, and opportu-
nities. IEEE Access 10:112392–112415. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2022.3216617
6. Chuang Y-N, Wang G, Yang F, Liu Z, Cai X, Du M, Hu X (2023)
Efﬁcient XAI techniques: a taxonomic survey. arXiv preprint.
arXiv:2302.03225
7. Sthle L, Wold S (1989) Analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Chemom Intell Lab Syst 6(4):259–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0169-7439(89)80095-4
8. Nugraha B, Jnanashree AV, Bauschert T (2024) An efﬁcient
explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI)-based framework for a
robust and explainable IDS. In: 2024 8th Cyber Security in Net-
working Conference (CSNet), pp. 173–181. https://doi.org/10.
1109/CSNet64211.2024.10851760
9. Ferreira P, Martins E, Silva J, Teixeira P (2025) Feature selec-
tion and XGBoost for enhanced intrusion detection: a comparative
study across benchmark datasets. In: 2025 13th International Sym-
posium on Digital Forensics and Security (ISDFS), pp. 1–6. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ISDFS65363.2025.11012060
10. Khani P et al (2024) Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for fea-
ture selection in network trafﬁc classiﬁcation: a comparative
study. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technolo-
gies. 35(4). https://doi.org/10.1002/ett.4970 . Early access or ﬁnal
version, depending on publication status
11. Shaker BN, Al-Musawi B, Hassan MF (2025) A lightweight IDS
for early APT detection using a novel feature selection method.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12108
12. Anagha AS, Thomas C, Balakrishnan N (2025) Optimized intru-
sion predictions through feature selection methods. Computers &
Security 157:104541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2025.104541
13. Rjoub G et al (2023) A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
for cybersecurity. IEEE Trans Netw Serv Manage 20(4):5115–
5140. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2023.3282740
14. Zhang Z, Hamadi HA, Damiani E, Yeun CY, Taher F (2022)
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence applications in cyber security:
state-of-the-art in research. IEEE Access 10:93104–93139. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3204051
15. Khan N, Ahmad K, Tamimi AA, Alani MM, Bermak A, Khalil I
(2024) Explainable AI-based intrusion detection system for Indus-
try 5.0: an overview of the literature, associated challenges, the
existing solutions, and potential research directions. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2408.03335
16. Mane S, Rao D (2021) Explaining network intrusion detec-
tion system using explainable AI framework. arXiv preprint.
arXiv:2103.07110
17. Mahbooba B, Timilsina M, Sahal R, Serrano M (2021) Explain-
able artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) to enhance trust management in
intrusion detection systems using decision tree model. Complexity
2021:1–11
18. Wang Y, Xu L, Liu W, Li R, Gu J (2023) Network intru-
sion detection based on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence. Wire-
less Pers Commun 131(2):1115–1130. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11277-023-10472-7
19. Houda ZAE, Brik B, Khoukhi L (2022) “Why should I trust your
ids?”: an explainable deep learning framework for intrusion detec-
tion systems in internet of things networks. IEEE Open Journal
of the Communications Society 3:1164–1170. https://doi.org/10.
1109/OJCOMS.2022.3188750
20. Barnard P, Marchetti N, Silva LAD (2022) Robust network intru-
sion detection through explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI).
IEEE Networking Letters. https://doi.org/10.1109/LNET.2022.
3186589
21. Kaur, N., Gupta, L.: Enhancing IoT security in 6G environ-
ment with transparent AI: leveraging XGBoost, SHAP and LIME.
In: 2024 IEEE 10th International Conference on Network Soft-
warization (NetSoft), pp. 180–184 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/
NetSoft60951.2024.10588922
22. Marcílio WE, Eler DM (2020) From explanations to feature
selection: assessing SHAP values as feature selection mecha-
nism. In: 2020 33rd SIBGRAPI Conference on Graphics, Patterns
and Images (SIBGRAPI), pp. 340–347. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SIBGRAPI51738.2020.00053
23. Khan IA, Moustafa N, Razzak I, Tanveer M, Pi D, Pan Y, Ali
BS (2022) XSRU-IoMT: explainable simple recurrent units for
threat detection in internet of medical things networks. Futur Gener
Comput Syst 127:181–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.
09.010
24. Khan IA, Moustafa N, Pi D, Sallam KM, Zomaya AY, Li B
(2022) A new explainable deep learning framework for cyber
threat discovery in industrial IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things J
9(13):11604–11613. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3130156
25. Khan IA, Razzak I, Pi D, Zia U, Kamal S, Hussain Y (2024) A novel
collaborative SRU network with dynamic behaviour aggregation,
reduced communication overhead and explainable features. IEEE J
Biomed Health Inform 28(6):3228–3235. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JBHI.2024.3352013
26. Burkart N, Franz M, Huber MF (2021) Explanation framework for
intrusion detection. In: Beyerer, J., Maier, A., Niggemann, O. (eds.)
Machine learning for cyber physical systems. Technologien für die
intelligente Automation, vol. 13. Springer, ???. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-662-62746-4_9
27. Cumi-Guzman BA, Espinosa-Chim AD, Orozco-Del-Castillo MG,
Recio-García JA (2024) Counterfactual explanation of a classiﬁ-
cation model for detecting SQL injection attacks. In: Proceedings
of the Workshops at the 32nd International Conference on Case-
Based Reasoning (ICCBR 2024). CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
vol. 3708, pp. 49–64. CEUR-WS.org, ???
28. Ables J, Childers N, Anderson W, Mittal S, Rahimi S, Banicescu I,
Seale M (2024) Eclectic rule extraction for explainability of deep
neural network based intrusion detection systems. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2401.10207
29. Ouhssini M, Afdel K, Akouhar M, Agherrabi E, Abarda A (2024)
Interpretable deep learning for DDoS defense: a SHAP-based
approach in cloud computing. In: 2024 International Conference
on Circuit, Systems and Communication (ICCSC), pp. 1–8. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ICCSC62074.2024.10616654
30. Mutlu G, Rihani N (2025) Intrusion detection system with explain-
able AI and federated learning. To be updated with publication
details
31. Yang J (2021) Fast treeshap: Accelerating SHAP value computa-
tion for trees. arXiv preprint. arXiv:2109.09847
123



===== PAGE 26 =====

1120
Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
32. Lemaire V, Clérot F, Boullé M (2023) An efﬁcient Shapley
value computation for the Naive Bayes classiﬁer. arXiv preprint.
arXiv:2307.16718. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
16718
33. Santhiappan S, Reghu MK, Saminathan M, Veerappan A (2024)
Speeding up lime using attention weights. In: Proceedings of the
7th Joint International Conference on Data Science & Management
of Data (11th ACM IKDD CODS and 29th COMAD), pp. 444–448.
Association for Computing Machinery, ??? . [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3632410.3632450
34. Muschalik M, Fumagalli F, Hammer B, Hüllermeier E (2024)
Beyond treeshap: efﬁcient computation of any-order Shapley inter-
actions for tree ensembles. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 38(13):14388–14396
35. Hassan F, Yu J, Syed ZS, Magsi AH, Ahmed N (2023) Devel-
oping transparent IDS for VANETs using LIME and SHAP: an
empirical study. Computers, Materials and Continua 77(3):3185–
3208. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2023.044650
36. Hassan F, Yu J, Syed ZS, Ahmed N, Reshan MSA, Shaikh A (2023)
Achieving model explainability for intrusion detection in VANETs
with LIME. PeerJ Computer Science 9:1440. https://doi.org/10.
7717/peerj-cs.1440
37. Senevirathna T, La VH, Marchal S, Siniarski B, Liyanage M, Wang
S (2024) A survey on XAI for 5g and beyond security: technical
aspects, challenges and research directions. IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2024.
3437248
38. Simonyan K, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A (2013) Deep inside con-
volutional networks: visualising image classiﬁcation models and
saliency maps. CoRR. abs/1312.6034. [Online]. Available: https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1450294
39. Sundararajan M, Taly A, Yan Q (2017) Axiomatic attribution for
deep networks. CoRR. abs/1703.01365. [Online]. Available: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1703.01365
40. Shrikumar A, Greenside P, Kundaje A (2017) Learning important
features through propagating activation differences. In: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
PMLR, ???
41. Sharafaldin I, Lashkari AH, Hakak S, Ghorbani AA (2019) Devel-
oping realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
and taxonomy. In: 2019 International Carnahan Conference on
Security Technology (ICCST), pp. 1–8. IEEE, ???
42. Neto ECP, Dadkhah S, Ferreira R, Zohourian A, Lu R, Ghorbani
AA (2023) CICIoT 2023: a real-time dataset and benchmark for
large-scale attacks in IoT environment. Sensors 23(13):5941
43. Amponis G et al (2023) 5G core PFCP intrusion detection dataset.
In: 2023 12th International Conference on Modern Circuits and
Systems Technologies (MOCAST), pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.
1109/MOCAST57943.2023.10176693
44. Chen T, Guestrin C (2016) XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting sys-
tem. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 785–
794
45. Arik SÖ, Pﬁster T (2019) Tabnet: attentive interpretable tabular
learning. CoRR. abs/1908.07442. arXiv:1908.07442
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
