

===== PAGE 1 =====

Does Knowledge Distillation Really Work?
Samuel Stanton
NYU
Pavel Izmailov
NYU
Polina Kirichenko
NYU
Alexander A. Alemi
Google Research
Andrew Gordon Wilson
NYU
Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a popular technique for training a small student network
to emulate a larger teacher model, such as an ensemble of networks. We show
that while knowledge distillation can improve student generalization, it does not
typically work as it is commonly understood: there often remains a surprisingly
large discrepancy between the predictive distributions of the teacher and the student,
even in cases when the student has the capacity to perfectly match the teacher.
We identify difﬁculties in optimization as a key reason for why the student is
unable to match the teacher. We also show how the details of the dataset used for
distillation play a role in how closely the student matches the teacher — and that
more closely matching the teacher paradoxically does not always lead to better
student generalization.
1
Introduction
Large, deep networks can learn representations that generalize well. While smaller, more efﬁcient
networks lack the inductive biases to ﬁnd these representations from training data alone, they may
have the capacity to represent these solutions [e.g., 2, 17, 29, 40]. Inﬂuential work on knowledge
distillation [20] argues that Bucil˘a et al. [5] “demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acquired
by a large ensemble of models [the teacher] can be transferred to a single small model [the student]”.
Indeed this quote encapsulates the conventional narrative of knowledge distillation: a student model
learns a high-ﬁdelity representation of a larger teacher, enabled by the teacher’s soft labels.
Conversely, in Figure 1 we show that with modern architectures knowledge distillation can lead to
students with very different predictions from their teachers, even when the student has the capacity to
perfectly match the teacher. Indeed, it is becoming well-known that in self-distillation the student
fails to match the teacher and, paradoxically, student generalization improves as a result [13, 36].
However, when the teacher is a large model (e.g. a deep ensemble) improvements in ﬁdelity translate
into improvements in generalization, as we show in Figure 1(b). For these large models there is still a
signiﬁcant accuracy gap between student and teacher, so ﬁdelity is aligned with generalization.
We will distinguish between ﬁdelity, the ability of a student to match a teacher’s predictions, and
generalization, the performance of a student in predicting unseen, in-distribution data. We show that
in many cases it is surprisingly difﬁcult to obtain good student ﬁdelity. In Section 5 we investigate
the hypothesis that low ﬁdelity is an identiﬁability problem that can be solved by augmenting the
distillation dataset. In Section 6 we investigate the hypothesis that low ﬁdelity is an optimization
problem resulting in a failure of the student to match the teacher even on the original training dataset.
We present a summary of our conclusions in Section 7.
Does knowledge distillation really work? In short: Yes, in the sense that it often improves student
generalization, though there is room for further improvement. No, in that knowledge distillation often
fails to live up to its name, transferring very limited knowledge from teacher to student.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.
arXiv:2106.05945v2  [cs.LG]  6 Dec 2021



===== PAGE 2 =====

CIFAR-100
+12.5k GAN
+25k GAN
+37.5k GAN
+50k GAN
70
71
72
73
74
75
Test Agreement
70
71
72
73
74
75
Test Accuracy
CIFAR-100
+12.5k GAN
+25k GAN
+37.5k GAN
+50k GAN
70
72
74
76
78
80
Test Agreement
70
72
74
76
78
80
Test Accuracy
Teacher-Student Agreement
Student Accuracy
Teacher Accuracy
(a) Self-distillation
(b) Ensemble distillation
Figure 1: Evaluating the ﬁdelity of knowledge distillation. The effect of enlarging the CIFAR-100
distillation dataset with GAN-generated samples. (a): The student and teacher are both single
ResNet-56 networks. Student ﬁdelity increases as the dataset grows, but test accuracy decreases.
(b): The student is a single ResNet-56 network and the teacher is a 3-component ensemble. Student
ﬁdelity again increases as the dataset grows, but test accuracy now slightly increases. The shaded
region corresponds to µ ± σ, estimated over 3 trials.
2
Related Work
Knowledge distillation can improve model efﬁciency [34, 40], unsupervised domain adaptation [33],
improved object detection [9], model transparency [43], and adversarial robustness [14, 38].
Seminal work by Bucil˘a et al. [5] showed that teacher-ensembles with thousands of simple components
could be compressed into a single shallow network that matched or outperformed its teacher. Other
early work proposed distilling ensembles of shallow networks into a single network [49], an idea
which resonates with more recent work on the distillation of deep ensembles [2, 7, 41, 45, 47].
Recently Fakoor et al. [12] developed a data-augmentation scheme for the distillation of large
ensembles of simple models for tabular data, achieving impressive results on a wide range of tabular
benchmarks. Malinin et al. [31] proposed a method to model the implicit distribution over predictive
distributions from which the ensemble component predictive distributions are drawn, rather than just
the ensemble model average.
Our work focuses explicitly on student ﬁdelity, decoupling our understanding of good ﬁdelity from
good generalization. We show that achieving good ﬁdelity is extremely difﬁcult, even with a variety
of interventions, and seek to understand, by systematically considering several hypotheses, why
knowledge distillation does not produce high ﬁdelity students for modern architectures and datasets.
In contrast, the distillation literature focuses largely on improving student generalization, without
particularly distinguishing between ﬁdelity and generalization.
For example, concurrent work by Beyer et al. [4] does not carefully distinguish generalization and
ﬁdelity metrics, but they assert that high student ﬁdelity is conceptually desirable and apparently
difﬁcult to achieve when measured as the gap between teacher and student accuracy. As a result
their work focuses most heavily on practical modiﬁcations to the distillation procedure for the best
student top-1 accuracy. In this paper we investigate many of the same prescriptions, including
careful treatment of data augmentation (such as showing the teacher and student the exact same input
images), the addition of MixUp, and extended training duration. We also ﬁnd that such interventions
do improve student accuracy, but there still remains a large discrepancy between the predictive
distributions of the teacher and the student. We also investigate multiple optimizers. While we do not
pursue Shampoo [16, 1] speciﬁcally, Beyer et al. [4] ﬁnd similar qualitative results for Shampoo and
Adam, besides faster convergence for Shampoo.
3
Preliminaries
We will focus on the supervised classiﬁcation setting, with input space X and label space Y, where
|Y| = c. Let f : X × Θ →Rc be a classiﬁer parameterized by θ ∈Θ whose outputs deﬁne a categor-
ical predictive distribution over Y, ˆp(y = i|x) = σi(f(x, θ)), where σi(z) := exp(zi)/ P
j exp(zj)
is the softmax link function. We will often refer to the outputs of a classiﬁer z := f(x, θ) as logits.
For convenience, we will use t and s as shorthand for fteacher and fstudent, respectively. When the
2



===== PAGE 3 =====

teacher is an m-component ensemble, the component logits (z1, . . . , zm), where zi = fi(x, θi), are
combined to form the teacher logits: zt = log (Pm
i=1 σ(zi)/m). These combined logits correspond
to the predictive distribution of the ensemble model average. The experiments in the main text
consider m ∈{1, 3, 5}, and we include results up to m = 12 in Appendix B.2.1
3.1
Knowledge Distillation
Hinton et al. [20] proposed a simple approach to knowledge distillation. The student minimizes a
weighted combination of two objectives, Ls := αLNLL+(1−α)LKD, where α ∈[0, 1). Speciﬁcally,
LNLL(zs, y) := −
c
X
j=1
yj log σj(zs),
LKD(zs, zt) := −τ 2
c
X
j=1
σj
zt
τ

log σj
zs
τ

.
(1)
LNLL is the usual supervised cross-entropy between the student logits zs and the one-hot labels y.
Recalling that KL(p||q) = P
j pj(log qj −log pj), we see that LNLL is equivalent (up to a constant)
to the KL from the empirical data distribution to the student predictive distribution (ˆps). LKD is
the added knowledge distillation term that encourages the student to match the teacher. It is the
cross-entropy between the teacher and student predictive distributions ˆpt = σ(zt) and ˆps = σ(zs),
both scaled by a temperature hyperparameter τ > 0. If τ = 1 then LKD is similarly equivalent to the
KL from the teacher to the student, KL(ˆpt||ˆps). Since we focus on distillation ﬁdelity, we choose
α = 0 for all experiments in the main text to avoid any confounding from true labels, but we also
include a limited ablation of α in Figure 14 in Appendix C.5 for the curious reader.
As τ →+∞, ∇zsLKD(zs, zt) ≈zt −zs, and thus in the limit ∇zsLKD is approximately equivalent
to ∇zs||zt −zs||2
2/2, assigning equal signiﬁcance to every class logit, regardless of its contribution
to the predictive distribution. In other words τ determines the “softness” of the teacher labels, which
in turn determines the allocation of student capacity. If the student is much smaller than the teacher,
the student capacity can be focused on matching the teacher’s top-k predictions, rather than matching
the full teacher distribution by choosing a moderate value (e.g. τ = 4). In Appendix B.1 we include
further discussion on the interplay of teacher ensemble size, teacher network capacity, and distillation
temperature on the student labels.
The teacher and student often share at least some training data. It is also common to enlarge the
student training data in some way (e.g. incorporating unlabeled examples as in Ba and Caruana [2]).
When there is a possibility of confusion, we will refer to the student’s training data as the distillation
data to distinguish it from the teacher’s training data.
3.2
Metrics and Evaluation
To measure generalization, we report top-1 accuracy, negative log-likelihood (NLL) and expected
calibration error (ECE) [15]. To measure ﬁdelity, we report the following:
Average Top-1 Agreement := 1
n
n
X
i=1
1{argmax
j
σj(zt,i) = argmax
j
σj(zs,i)},
(2)
Average Predictive KL := 1
n
n
X
i=1
KL (ˆpt(y|xi) || ˆps(y|xi)) ,
(3)
Eqn. (2) is the average agreement between the student and teacher’s top-1 label. Eqn. (3) is the
average KL divergence from the predictive distribution of the teacher to that of the student, a measure
of ﬁdelity sensitive to all of the labels.
While improvements in generalization metrics are relatively easy to understand, interpreting ﬁdelity
metrics requires some care. For example, suppose we have three independent models: f1, f2, and f3
that respectively achieve 55%, 75%, and 95% test accuracy. f1 and f3 can agree on at most 60% of
points, whereas f2 and f3 agree on at least 70%, but it would obviously be incorrect to make any
claim about f2 being a better distillation of f3 since each model was trained completely independently.
To account for such confounding when evaluating the distillation of a student s from a teacher t, we
also evaluate another student s′ distilled through an identical procedure from an independent teacher.
1Code for all experiments can be found at https://github.com/samuelstanton/gnosis.
3



===== PAGE 4 =====

By comparing the ﬁdelity of (t, s) and (t, s′) we can distinguish between a generic improvement in
generalization and an improvement speciﬁcally to ﬁdelity. If s and s′ have comparable ﬁdelity, then
the students agree with the teacher at many points because they generalize well, and not the reverse.
4
Knowledge Distillation Transfers Knowledge Poorly
In this section, we present evidence that we are not able to distill large networks such as a ResNet-56
with high ﬁdelity, and discuss why high ﬁdelity is an important objective.
4.1
When is knowledge transfer successful?
We ﬁrst consider the easy task of distilling a LeNet-5 teacher into an identical student network as
a motivating example. We train the teacher on a random subset of 200 examples from the MNIST
training set for 100 epochs, resulting in a 84% to 86% teacher test accuracy across different subsets.2
We then distill the teacher using the full MNIST train dataset with 60,000 examples, as well as 25%,
50%, and 100% of the EMNIST train dataset [11]. The EMNIST train set contains 697,932 images.
In Figure 2 we see that knowledge distillation works as expected. With enough examples the student
learns to make the same predictions as the teacher (over 99% top-1 test agreement). Notably, in this
case, self-distillation does not improve generalization, since the slight difference between the teacher
and student accuracy is explained by variance between trials.
MNIST 60k
EMNIST 175k
EMNIST 350k
EMNIST 700k
80
85
90
95
100
Test Agreement
80
85
90
95
100
Test Accuracy
Student Accuracy
Teacher Accuracy
Agreement
Figure 2: LeNet-5 self-distillation on
MNIST with additional distillation data.
The shaded region corresponds to µ ± σ,
estimated over 3 trials.
Now we consider a more challenging task: distilling a
ResNet-56 teacher trained on CIFAR-100 into an identical
student network (Figure 1, left). Since no dataset drawn
from the same distribution as CIFAR-100 is publicly avail-
able, to augment the distillation data, we instead combined
samples from an SN-GAN [35] pre-trained on CIFAR-100
with the original CIFAR-100 train dataset. Appendix A.3
details the hyperparameters and training procedure for the
GAN, teacher, and student.
Like the MNIST experiment, as we enlarge the distillation
dataset the student ﬁdelity improves. However, in this
case the improvement is modest, with the ﬁdelity reaching
nowhere near 99% test agreement. Since a ResNet-56 has
many more parameters than a LeNet-5, it is possible that
the student simply has not seen enough examples to per-
fectly emulate the teacher, a hypothesis we discuss in more
detail in Section 5.1. Also, like the MNIST experiment,
as the distillation dataset grows the student accuracy ap-
proaches the teacher’s. Unlike the MNIST experiment, the
student test accuracy is higher than the teacher’s when the distillation dataset is small, so increasing
ﬁdelity decreases student generalization.
4.2
What can self-distillation tell us about knowledge distillation in general?
We have seen in Figure 1(a) that with self-distillation the student can exceed the teacher performance,
in accordance with Furlanello et al. [13]. This result is only possible by virtue of failing at the
distillation procedure: if the student matched the teacher perfectly then the student could not
outperform the teacher. On the other hand, if the teacher generalizes signiﬁcantly better than an
independently trained student, we would expect the beneﬁts of ﬁdelity to dominate other regularization
effects associated with not matching the teacher. This setting reﬂects the original motivation for
knowledge distillation, where we wish to faithfully transfer the representation discovered by a large
model or ensemble of models into a more efﬁcient student.
In Figure 1(b) we see that if we move from self-distillation to the distillation of a 3 ResNet-56 teacher
ensemble, ﬁdelity becomes positively correlated with generalization. But there is still a signiﬁcant
2We took only a subset of the MNIST train set since otherwise every teacher network as well as the ensemble
would achieve over 99% test accuracy.
4



===== PAGE 5 =====

Baseline
Baseline(τ = 4)
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter
CombAug
MixUp
MixUp(τ = 4) GAN(τ = 4)
OOD
Noise
0.72
0.74
0.76
Accuracy
Baseline
Baseline(τ = 4)
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter
CombAug
MixUp
MixUp(τ = 4) GAN(τ = 4)
OOD
Noise
0.75
0.80
0.85
Agreement
Figure 3: Data augmentation and distillation: Test accuracy and teacher-student agreement when
distilling a 5-component ResNet-56 teacher ensemble into a ResNet-56 student on CIFAR-100 with
varying augmentation policies. The best performing policy is shown in green, results averaged over 3
runs. Additional metrics are reported in Figure 11 in Appendix C. Mixup and GAN augmentation
provide the best generalization, and Mixup(τ = 4) provides the best ﬁdelity. The baseline policy
(crops and ﬂips) with τ = 4 is a surprisingly strong baseline. The error bars indicate ±σ.
gap in ﬁdelity, even after the distillation set is enlarged with 50k GAN samples. In practice, the
gap remains large enough that higher ﬁdelity students do not always have better generalization, and
the regularization effects we see in self-distillation do play a role for more broadly understanding
student generalization. We will indeed show in Section 5 that higher ﬁdelity students do not always
generalize better, even if the teacher generalizes much better than the student.
4.3
If distillation already improves generalization, why care about ﬁdelity?
While knowledge distillation does often improve generalization, understanding the relationship
between ﬁdelity and generalization, and how to maximize ﬁdelity, is important for several reasons —
including better generalization!
Better generalization in distilling large teacher models and ensembles.
Knowledge distillation
was initially motivated as a means to deploy powerful models to small devices or low-latency
controllers [e.g., 10, 19, 24, 46, 48]. While in self-distillation generalization and ﬁdelity are in
tension, there is often a signiﬁcant disparity in generalization between large teacher models, including
ensembles, and smaller students. We have seen this disparity in Figure 1(b). We additionally show in
Figure 10 in Appendix B.1 that as we increase the number of ensemble components, the generalization
disparity between teacher and distilled student increases. Improving student ﬁdelity is the most
obvious way to close the generalization disparity between student and teacher in these settings. Even
if one exclusively cares about student accuracy, ﬁdelity is a key consideration outside self-distillation.
Interpretability and reliability.
Knowledge distillation has been identiﬁed as a means to transfer
representations discovered by large black-box models into simpler more interpretable models, for
example to provide insights into medical diagnostics, or discovering rules for understanding sentiment
in text [e.g., 21, 22, 6, 30, 8]. The ability to perform this transfer could have extraordinary scientiﬁc
consequences: large models can often discover structure in data that we would not have anticipated
a priori. Moreover, we often want to transfer properties such as well-calibrated uncertainties or
robustness, which have been well-established for larger models, so that we can safely deploy more
efﬁcient models in their place. In both cases, achieving good distillation ﬁdelity is crucial.
Understanding.
The name knowledge distillation implies we are transferring knowledge from
the teacher to the student. For this reason, improved student generalization as a consequence of a
distillation procedure is sometimes conﬂated with ﬁdelity. Decoupling ﬁdelity and generalization,
and explicitly studying ﬁdelity, is foundational to understanding how knowledge distillation works
and how we can make it more useful across a variety of applications.
4.4
Possible causes of low distillation ﬁdelity
If we are able to match the student model to the teacher on a comprehensive distillation dataset, we
expect it to match on the test data as well, achieving high distillation ﬁdelity3. Possible causes of the
poor distillation ﬁdelity in our CIFAR-100 experiments include:
3See, for example, Lemma 1 in Fakoor et al. [12].
5



===== PAGE 6 =====

1
3
5
Teacher size
0.64
0.66
0.68
Test Accuracy
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Test NLL
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Test ECE
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
Test Agreement
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.6
0.8
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
1
4
8
16
Temperature
0.64
0.66
0.68
Test Accuracy
1
4
8
16
Temperature
1.4
1.6
1.8
Test NLL
1
4
8
16
Temperature
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Test ECE
1
4
8
16
Temperature
0.75
0.80
Test Agreement
1
4
8
16
Temperature
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
D0
D1
D0 ∪D1
Teacher
Figure 4: Data recycling and distillation: results on subsampled CIFAR-100. Top: We ﬁx the
temperature (τ = 4) and vary the number of ensemble components (m), comparing students distilled
on the same dataset as the teacher (D0/D0), a reserved dataset (D0/D1), or both (D0/D0 ∪D1).
Distilling on both produces the best result, while distilling on D0 increases accuracy and decreases
ﬁdelity, relative to D1. Bottom: We repeat the experiment, but ﬁx m = 3 and vary τ. The shaded
region corresponds to µ ± σ, estimated over 3 trials.
Student capacity – We observe low ﬁdelity even in the self-distillation setting, so we can rule out
student capacity as a primary cause, but we also conﬁrm in Figure 12 in Appendix C.1 that increasing
the student capacity has very little effect on ﬁdelity in the ensemble-distillation setting.
Network architecture – Low ﬁdelity could be speciﬁc to ResNet-like architectures, an explanation
we rule out by showing similar results with VGG networks [42] in Figure 13 in Appendix C.2.
Dataset scale and complexity – we provide similar results in Section C.3 for ImageNet, showing
that our ﬁndings apply to datasets of larger scale and complexity.
Data domain – Similarly in Section C.4 we observe low distillation ﬁdelity in the context of text
classiﬁcation (sentiment analysis on the IMDB dataset), showing our results are relevant beyond
image classiﬁcation.
Identiﬁability (Section 5) – the distillation data is insufﬁcient to distinguish high-ﬁdelity and low-
ﬁdelity students. In other words, matching the teacher predictions on the distillation dataset does not
lead to matching predictions on the test data.
Optimization (Section 6) – we are unable to solve the distillation optimization problem sufﬁciently
well. The student does not agree with the teacher on test because it does not even agree on train.
5
Identiﬁability: Are We Using the Right Distillation Dataset?
We investigate whether it is possible to attain the level of ﬁdelity observed with LeNet-5s on MNIST
with ResNets on CIFAR-100 by addressing the identiﬁability problem — have we shown the student
enough of the right input-teacher label pairs to deﬁne the solution we want?
5.1
Should we do more data augmentation?
Data augmentation is a simple and practical method to increase the support of the distillation data
distribution. If identiﬁability is a primary cause of poor distillation ﬁdelity, using a more extensive
data augmentation strategy during distillation should improve ﬁdelity.
To test this hypothesis, we evaluated the effect of several augmentation strategies on student ﬁdelity
and generalization. In Figure 3, the teacher is a 5-component ensemble of ResNet-56 networks
trained on CIFAR-100 with the Baseline augmentation strategy: horizontal ﬂips and random crops.
6



===== PAGE 7 =====

We report the student accuracy and teacher-student agreement for each augmentation strategy, and
also include results for Baseline with τ = 1 and τ = 4 to demonstrate the effect of logit tempering.
We ﬁrst observe that the best augmentation policies for generalization, MixUp, and GAN4, are not
the best policies for ﬁdelity. Furthermore, although many augmentation strategies enable slightly
higher distillation ﬁdelity compared to Baseline (τ = 1), even the best augmentation policy, Mixup
(τ = 4), only achieves a modest 86% test agreement. In fact the Baseline (τ = 4) policy is quite
competitive, achieving 84.5% test agreement. Many of the augmentation strategies also slightly
improve teacher-student KL relative to Baseline (τ = 4) (see Figure 11).
In Figure 11 in Appendix B.3 we report all generalization and ﬁdelity metrics for a range of ensemble
sizes, as well as the results for the independent student baseline discussed in Section 3.2. Often these
independent students, taught how to mimic a completely different model, have nearly as good test
agreement with the teacher as the student explicitly trained to emulate it. See Appendix A.1 for a
detailed description of the augmentation procedures.
Should data augmentation be close to the data distribution?
In theory, any data augmentation
should help with identiﬁability: if a student matches a teacher on more data, it is more likely to match
the teacher elsewhere. However, the Noise and OOD augmentation strategies based on noise and out-
of-distribution data fail on all metrics, decreasing performance compared to the baseline. In practice,
data augmentation has an effect beyond improving identiﬁability — it has a regularizing effect,
making optimization more challenging. We explore this facet of data augmentation in Section 6.
The slight improvements to ﬁdelity with extensive augmentations suggest that increasing the support
of the distillation dataset can indeed improve distillation ﬁdelity. However, since the beneﬁt is so
small compared to heuristics like logit tempering (which does not modify the support at all), it is very
unlikely that an insufﬁcient quantity of teacher labels is the primary obstacle to high ﬁdelity.
5.2
The data recycling hypothesis
If simply showing the student more labels does not always signiﬁcantly improve ﬁdelity, perhaps we
are not showing the student the right labels. Additional data augmentation during distillation does
give the student more teacher labels to match, but also introduces a distribution shift between the
images the teacher was trained on and the images the student is distilling on. Even when the teacher
and student have the same augmentation policy, reusing the teacher’s training data for distillation
violates the assumptions of empirical risk minimization (ERM) because the distillation data is not an
independent draw from the true joint distribution over images and teacher labels. What if there was
no augmentation distribution shift, and the student was distilled on a fresh draw from the joint test
distribution over images and teacher labels?
To investigate the effect of recycling teacher data during distillation we randomly split the CIFAR-100
training dataset D into two equal parts, D0 and D1. We train teacher ResNet-56 ensembles on D0,
and then compare s0, a student distilled on the original D0, s1, a student distilled on the unseen D1,
and s0∪1, a student distilled on both: D0 ∪D1. Note that the students cannot access the true labels,
only those provided by the teacher. We present the results in Figure 4, varying the ensemble size in
the top row and the logit temperature in the bottom row.
Surprisingly, s0 attains higher test accuracy than s1, while showing worse ECE and lower ﬁdelity
(measured by test teacher-student agreement and test teacher-student KL). Therefore, the hypothesis
that s1 should be a higher ﬁdelity distillation of the teacher than s0 does hold, but the gain in ﬁdelity
does not result in s1 best replicating the teacher’s accuracy. The best attributes of s0 and s1 are
combined by s0∪1, which coincides with how unlabeled data is typically used in practice [2]. The
reason for this puzzling observation is simply that for the larger teachers ﬁdelity has not improved
enough to also improve generalization. In fact, the best teacher-student agreement is only around
85%, no improvement when compared to the results from extensive data augmentation in the last
section. We again ﬁnd that modifying the distillation data can slightly improve ﬁdelity, but the
evidence does not support blaming poor distillation ﬁdelity on the wrong choice of distillation data.
4Unlike Figure 1, for Figure 3 we generated new GAN samples every epoch, to mimic data augmentation.
7



===== PAGE 8 =====

CIFAR-100
+12.5k GAN
+25k GAN
+37.5k GAN
+50k GAN
90
95
100
Train Agreement
GAN-Generated Data
D0
D0 ∪D1
D1
80
90
100
Train Agreement
Held-Out Data
Baseline
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter Combined Augs
60
80
100
Train Agreement
Data Augmentation
1 Teacher
3 Teachers
5 Teachers
Figure 5: The train agreement for teacher ensembles (m ∈{1, 3, 5}) and student on the distillation
data for a ResNet-56 on CIFAR-100 under different augmentation policies. In all panels, increasing
the softness of the teacher labels by adding examples not in the teacher train data makes distillation
more difﬁcult. Left: agreement for the synthetic GAN-augmentation policy from Figure 1. Middle:
agreement from subsampled CIFAR-100 experiment in Figure 4. Right: agreement for some of the
augmentation policies in Figure 3. The shaded region is not visible because the variance is very low.
6
Optimization: Does the Student Match the Teacher on Distillation Data?
If poor ﬁdelity is not primarily an identiﬁability problem from the wrong choice of distillation data,
perhaps there is a simpler explanation. Up to this point, we have focused on student ﬁdelity on a
held-out test set. Now we turn our attention to student behavior on the distillation data itself. Does
the student match the teacher on the data it is trained to match it on?
6.1
More distillation data lowers train agreement
In Figure 1 we presented an experiment distilling ResNet-56 networks on CIFAR-100 augmented with
synthetic GAN-generated images. We saw that enlarging the distillation dataset leads to improved
teacher-student agreement on test, but the agreement remains relatively low (below 80%) even for the
largest distillation dataset that we considered. In Figure 5 (left panel), we report the teacher-student
agreement for the same experiment, but now on the distillation dataset. We now observe the opposite
trend: as the distillation dataset becomes larger, it becomes more challenging for the student to match
the teacher. Even when the student has identical capacity to the teacher, the student only achieves
95% agreement with the teacher when we use 50k synthetic images for distillation.
The drop in train agreement is even more pronounced when we use extensive data augmentation. In
Figure 5, right panel, we report the teacher-student agreement on the train set with data augmentation
for a subset of augmentation strategies presented in Section 5.1. We use the CIFAR-100 dataset and
the ResNet-56 model for the teachers and the students (for details, see Section 5.1). In each case,
we measure agreement on the augmented training set that was used during distillation. While for
the baseline augmentation strategy, we can achieve almost perfect teacher-student agreement, for
heavier augmentations the agreement drops dramatically. For the Rotation, Vertical Flip and Color
Jitter augmentations, the agreement is between 80% and 90% for all the considered teacher sizes.
For Combined Augs, the combination of these three augmentation strategies, the agreement drops
even further, to just 60% in self-distillation!
Our intuition about how knowledge distillation should work largely hinges on the assumption that
after distillation the student matches the teacher on the distillation set. However, the results presented
in this section suggest that in practice the optimization method is unable to achieve high ﬁdelity even
on the distillation dataset when extensive data augmentation or synthetic data is used. The inability
to solve the optimization problem undermines distillation: in order to ﬁnd a student that would match
the teacher on all inputs, we need to at least be able to ﬁnd a student that would match the teacher on
all of the distillation data.
Optimization and the train-test ﬁdelity gap.
Notably, despite having the lowest train agreement,
the Combined Augs policy results in better test agreement than other polices with better train
agreement (Figure 3). This result highlights a fundamental trade-off in knowledge distillation: the
student needs many teacher labels match the teacher on test, but introducing examples not in the
teacher train data makes matching the teacher on the distillation data very difﬁcult.
8



===== PAGE 9 =====

300 1k
5k
1k
5k
Number of Epochs
78
80
82
84
Train Agreement
Adam
SGD
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
λ
52
53
Train Loss
80
85
90
95
100
Train Agreement
0
25
50
75
λ
−25
0
25
50
75
100
125
Teacher
Student
Init
λ = 0.0
0
20
40
60
λ
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Teacher
Student
Init
λ = 0.25
0
20
40
60
λ
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Teacher
Student
Init
λ = 0.375
48
50
56
64
68
72
74
76
80
85
Train Loss
(a) Optimizer effect
(b) Initialization effect
(c) Loss Visualization
Figure 6: Optimization and distillation: self-distillation with ResNet-20s with LayerNorm on
CIFAR-100. (a): Final train agreement for SGD and Adam optimizers. Training longer improves
agreement, but it remains below 85% even after 5k epochs. (b): Final train loss and agreement when
the initialization is a convex combination of teacher and random weights, θs = λθt + (1 −λ)θr. (c):
Projections of the distillation loss surface on the plane intersecting θt, the initial student weights,
and the ﬁnal student weights for different λ. When λ is small, the student converges to a suboptimal
solution with low agreement. The uncertainty regions correspond to µ ± σ, estimated over 3 trials.
6.2
Why is train agreement so low?
A simpliﬁed distillation experiment. To simplify our exploration, we focus on self-distillation of
a ResNet-20 on CIFAR-100. We use the Baseline data augmentation strategy, as we found that a
ResNet-20 student is unable to match the teacher on train even with basic augmentation. We also
replace the BatchNorm layers [23] in ResNet-20 with LayerNorm [3], because we found that with
BatchNorm layers even when the teacher and the student have identical weights, they can make
different predictions due to differences in the activation statistics accumulated by the BatchNorm
layers. Layer normalization does not collect any activation statistics, so the student will match the
teacher as long as the weights coincide.
Can we solve the optimization problem better? We verify that the distillation ﬁdelity cannot be
signiﬁcantly improved by training longer or with a different optimizer. By default, in our experiments
we use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum, train the student for 300 epochs, and use a
weight decay value of 10−4. In Figure 6 we report the results for the SGD and Adam [25] optimizers
run for 1k and 5k epochs without weight decay. Switching from SGD to Adam only reduced ﬁdelity.
For both optimizers, training for more epochs does slightly improve train agreement. In particular,
with SGD we achieve 83.3% agreement when training for 5k epochs compared to 78.95% when
training for 300 epochs. It is possible, though unlikely, that if we train for even more epochs the train
agreement could reach 100%. However, training for 5k epochs is signiﬁcantly longer than what is
typically done in practice (100 to 500 epochs). Furthermore, the improvement from 1k to 5k epochs
is only about 2%, suggesting that we would need to train for tens of thousands of epochs, even in the
optimistic case that agreement improves linearly, in order to get close to 100% train agreement.
The distillation loss surface hypothesis: If we cannot perfectly distill a ResNet-20 on CIFAR-100
with any of the interventions we have discussed so far, we now ask if there is any modiﬁcation of the
problem that can produce a high-ﬁdelity student.
In the self-distillation setting, we do know of at least one set of weights that is optimal w.r.t. the
distillation loss — the teacher’s own weights θt. Letting θr be a random weight initialization, in
Figure 6 (a) we examine the effect of choosing the student initialization to be a convex combination
of the teacher and random weights, θs = λθt + (1 −λ)θr. After being initialized in this way, the
student was trained as before. In other words λ = 0 corresponds to a random initialization and λ = 1
corresponds to initializing the student weights at the ﬁnal teacher weights.
We ﬁnd that if the student is initialized far from the teacher (λ ≤0.25), the optimizer converges to a
sub-optimal value of the distillation loss, producing a student that signiﬁcantly disagrees with the
teacher. However at λ = 0.375 there is a sudden change. The ﬁnal train loss drops to the optimal
value and the agreement drastically increases, and the behavior continues for λ > 0.375. To further
investigate, in Figure 6 (c) we visualize the distillation loss surface for λ ∈{0, 0.25, 0.375} projected
on the 2D subspace intersecting θt, the initial student weights, and the ﬁnal student weights. If the
student is initialized far from the teacher (λ ∈{0, 0.25}), it converges to a distinct, sub-optimal basin
of the loss surface. On the other hand, when initialized close to the teacher (λ = 0.375), the student
converges to the same basin as the teacher, achieving nearly 100% agreement.
9



===== PAGE 10 =====

CKA (↑)
Init.
Agree. (↑)
KL (↓)
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Rand.
77.174 (0.352)
0.836 (0.016)
0.939 (0.017)
0.925 (0.027)
0.885 (0.011)
Teach.
77.098 (0.238)
0.838 (0.020)
0.951 (0.017)
0.937 (0.020)
0.890 (0.015)
Table 1: We examine whether ﬁdelity can be improved in the context of ResNet-20 self-distillation on
CIFAR-100 if the teacher and student share the same weight initialization. All metrics are computed
on the test set. A shared initialization does make the student slightly more similar to the teacher in
activation space (measured by CKA), but in function space the results are indistinguishable from
randomly initialized students. We report the mean and standard deviation, estimated from 10 trials.
The average teacher accuracy was 70.522 (0.412).
Is using the initial teacher weights enough for good ﬁdelity? If good ﬁdelity can be obtained
by initializing the student near the ﬁnal teacher weights, it is possible that similar results could be
obtained by initializing the student at the initial teacher weights. In Table 1 we compare students
distilled from random initializations with those initialized at the initial teacher weights. In addition to
the metrics reported in the rest of the paper, we also include the centered kernel alignment (CKA)
[26] of the preactivations of each of the teacher and student networks. There is a small increase in
CKA, indicating that sharing an initialization between teacher and student does increase alignment in
activation space, but functionally the students are identical to their randomly initialized counterparts –
there is no observable change in accuracy, agreement, or predictive KL when compared to random
initialization.
To summarize, we have at last identiﬁed a root cause of the ineffectiveness of all our previous
interventions on the knowledge distillation procedure. Knowledge distillation is unable to converge
to optimal student parameters, even when we know a solution and give the initialization a small head
start in the direction of an optimum. Indeed, while identiﬁability can be an issue, in order to match
the teacher on all inputs, the student has to at least match the teacher on the data used for distillation,
and achieve a near-optimal value of the distillation loss. Furthermore, the suboptimal convergence of
knowledge distillation appears to be a consequence of the optimization dynamics speciﬁcally, and not
simply initialization bias. In practice, optimization converges to sub-optimal solutions, leading to
poor distillation ﬁdelity.
7
Discussion
Our work provides several new key ﬁndings about knowledge distillation:
• Good student accuracy does not imply good distillation ﬁdelity: even outside of self-
distillation, the models with the best generalization do not always achieve the best ﬁdelity.
• Student ﬁdelity is correlated with calibration when distilling ensembles: although the
highest-ﬁdelity student is not always the most accurate, it is always the best calibrated.
• Optimization is challenging in knowledge distillation: even in cases when the student has
sufﬁcient capacity to match the teacher on the distillation data, it is unable to do so.
• There is a trade-off between optimization complexity and distillation data quality: Enlarging
the distillation dataset beyond the teacher training data makes it easier for the student to
identify the correct solution, but also makes an already difﬁcult optimization problem harder.
In standard deep learning, we are saved by not needing to solve the optimization problem well: while
it true that our training loss is highly multimodal, properties such as the ﬂatness of good solutions,
the inductive biases of the network, and the implicit biases of SGD, often enable good generalization
in practice. In knowledge distillation, however, good ﬁdelity is directly aligned with solving what
turns out to be an exceptionally difﬁcult optimization problem.
10



===== PAGE 11 =====

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Gregory Benton, Marc Finzi, Sanae Lotﬁ, Nate Gruver, and Ben
Poole for helpful feedback. This research is supported by an Amazon Research Award, NSF I-DISRE
193471, NIH R01DA048764-01A1, NSF IIS-1910266, and NSF 1922658NRT-HDR: FUTURE
Foundations, Translation, and Responsibility for Data Science. Samuel Stanton is also supported by
a United States Department of Defense NDSEG fellowship.
References
[1] Anil, R., Gupta, V., Koren, T., Regan, K., and Singer, Y. (2021). Scalable second order optimiza-
tion for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09018.
[2] Ba, J. and Caruana, R. (2014). Do deep nets really need to be deep?
Advances in neural
information processing systems, 27:2654–2662.
[3] Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. (2016). Layer normalization. Proceedings of the NIPS
2016 Deep Learning Symposium.
[4] Beyer, L., Zhai, X., Royer, A., Markeeva, L., Anil, R., and Kolesnikov, A. (2021). Knowledge
distillation: A good teacher is patient and consistent.
[5] Bucil˘a, C., Caruana, R., and Niculescu-Mizil, A. (2006). Model compression. In Proceedings of
the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages
535–541.
[6] Che, Z., Purushotham, S., Khemani, R., and Liu, Y. (2015). Distilling knowledge from deep
networks with applications to healthcare domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03542.
[7] Chebotar, Y. and Waters, A. (2016). Distilling knowledge from ensembles of neural networks for
speech recognition. In Interspeech, pages 3439–3443.
[8] Chen, D., Mei, J.-P., Wang, C., Feng, Y., and Chen, C. (2020). Online knowledge distillation
with diverse peers. In AAAI, pages 3430–3437.
[9] Chen, G., Choi, W., Yu, X., Han, T., and Chandraker, M. (2017). Learning efﬁcient object
detection models with knowledge distillation. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 742–751.
[10] Cho, J. H. and Hariharan, B. (2019). On the efﬁcacy of knowledge distillation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4794–4802.
[11] Cohen, G., Afshar, S., Tapson, J., and Van Schaik, A. (2017). Emnist: Extending mnist to
handwritten letters. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages
2921–2926. IEEE.
[12] Fakoor, R., Mueller, J. W., Erickson, N., Chaudhari, P., and Smola, A. J. (2020). Fast, accurate,
and simple models for tabular data via augmented distillation. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33.
[13] Furlanello, T., Lipton, Z., Tschannen, M., Itti, L., and Anandkumar, A. (2018). Born again
neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1607–1616. PMLR.
[14] Goldblum, M., Fowl, L., Feizi, S., and Goldstein, T. (2020). Adversarially robust distillation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 3996–4003.
[15] Guo, C., Pleiss, G., Sun, Y., and Weinberger, K. Q. (2017). On calibration of modern neural
networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1321–1330. PMLR.
[16] Gupta, V., Koren, T., and Singer, Y. (2018). Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor
optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1842–1850.
11



===== PAGE 12 =====

[17] Han, S., Mao, H., and Dally, W. J. (2016). Deep compression: Compressing deep neural
networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
[18] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778.
[19] Heo, B., Lee, M., Yun, S., and Choi, J. Y. (2019). Knowledge transfer via distillation of
activation boundaries formed by hidden neurons. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 3779–3787.
[20] Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., and Dean, J. (2015). Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531.
[21] Hu, Z., Ma, X., Liu, Z., Hovy, E., and Xing, E. (2016a). Harnessing deep neural networks with
logic rules. In Association for Computational Linguistics.
[22] Hu, Z., Yang, Z., Salakhutdinov, R., and Xing, E. (2016b). Deep neural networks with massive
learned knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1670–1679.
[23] Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pages 448–456.
PMLR.
[24] Kim, Y. and Rush, A. M. (2016). Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1317–1327.
[25] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
[26] Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Lee, H., and Hinton, G. (2019). Similarity of neural network
representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3519–3529.
PMLR.
[27] Krizhevsky, A. et al. (2009). Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
[28] LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J. S., Henderson, D., Howard, R. E., Hubbard, W., and Jackel,
L. D. (1989a). Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural computation,
1(4):541–551.
[29] LeCun, Y., Denker, J. S., Solla, S. A., Howard, R. E., and Jackel, L. D. (1989b). Optimal brain
damage. In NIPs, volume 2, pages 598–605. Citeseer.
[30] Liu, X., Wang, X., and Matwin, S. (2018). Improving the interpretability of deep neural
networks with knowledge distillation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
Workshops (ICDMW), pages 905–912. IEEE.
[31] Malinin, A., Mlodozeniec, B., and Gales, M. (2019). Ensemble distribution distillation. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
[32] Marcel, S. and Rodriguez, Y. (2010). Torchvision the machine-vision package of torch. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages 1485–1488.
[33] Meng, Z., Li, J., Gong, Y., and Juang, B.-H. (2018). Adversarial teacher-student learning for
unsupervised domain adaptation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 5949–5953. IEEE.
[34] Mishra, A. and Marr, D. (2018). Apprentice: Using knowledge distillation techniques to improve
low-precision network accuracy. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
[35] Miyato, T., Kataoka, T., Koyama, M., and Yoshida, Y. (2018). Spectral normalization for
generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
12



===== PAGE 13 =====

[36] Mobahi, H., Farajtabar, M., and Bartlett, P. L. (2020). Self-distillation ampliﬁes regularization
in hilbert space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[37] Netzer, Y., Wang, T., Coates, A., Bissacco, A., Wu, B., and Ng, A. Y. (2011). Reading digits in
natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.
[38] Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Wu, X., Jha, S., and Swami, A. (2016). Distillation as a defense to
adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP), pages 582–597. IEEE.
[39] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z.,
Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A.,
Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. (2019). Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A.,
d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32, pages 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc.
[40] Romero, A., Ballas, N., Kahou, S. E., Chassang, A., Gatta, C., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Fitnets:
Hints for thin deep nets. International Conference on Learning Representations.
[41] Shen, Z., He, Z., and Xue, X. (2019). Meal: Multi-model ensemble via adversarial learning. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 4886–4893.
[42] Simonyan, K. and Zisserman, A. (2015). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition. International Conference on Learning Representations.
[43] Tan, S., Caruana, R., Hooker, G., and Lou, Y. (2018). Distill-and-compare: Auditing black-box
models using transparent model distillation. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 303–310.
[44] Tokozume, Y., Ushiku, Y., and Harada, T. (2018). Between-class learning for image classiﬁca-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
5486–5494.
[45] Urban, G., Geras, K. J., Kahou, S. E., Aslan, O., Wang, S., Caruana, R., Mohamed, A.,
Philipose, M., and Richardson, M. (2017). Do deep convolutional nets really need to be deep and
convolutional? International Conference on Learning Representations.
[46] Yim, J., Joo, D., Bae, J., and Kim, J. (2017).
A gift from knowledge distillation: Fast
optimization, network minimization and transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4133–4141.
[47] You, S., Xu, C., Xu, C., and Tao, D. (2017). Learning from multiple teacher networks. In
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 1285–1294.
[48] Zagoruyko, S. and Komodakis, N. (2017). Paying more attention to attention: Improving the
performance of convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. International Conference on
Learning Representations.
[49] Zeng, X. and Martinez, T. R. (2000). Using a neural network to approximate an ensemble of
classiﬁers. Neural Processing Letters, 12(3):225–237.
[50] Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N., and Lopez-Paz, D. (2018). Mixup: Beyond empirical risk
minimization. International Conference on Learning Representations.
Appendix
Supplement Outline:
A. Implementation details for all experiments.
B. Additional experiments with the teacher ensemble size ablation.
C. Experiments addressing spurious explanations for poor student ﬁdelity.
13



===== PAGE 14 =====

A
Implementation details
Here we brieﬂy describe key implementation details to reproduce our experiments. Data augmentation
details are given in A.1, followed by architecture details in A.2, and ﬁnally training details are provided
in A.3. The reader is encouraged to consult the included code for closer inspection.
A.1
Data augmentation procedures
Some of the data augmentation procedures we consider attempt to generate data that is close to the
train data distribution (standard augmentations, GAN, mixup). Others (random noise, out-of-domain
data) produce data for distillation that the teacher would never encounter during normal supervised
training. In particular, we compare the following augmentation procedures:
Baseline augmentations
As a baseline, we use the same data augmentation strategy that was used
to train the teachers during distillation: we apply random horizontal ﬂips (p = 0.5) and random shifts
via pad and random-crop with a 4 pixel pad width. In all of the conﬁgurations we consider in this
section we use this set of augmentations along with other strategies, unless stated otherwise.
Conventional image transformations
Standard data augmentations used in computer vision [32]:
random rotations by up to 20 degrees, random vertical ﬂips, color jitter and all possible combinations.
Mixup
Mixup is an effective regularization technique originally proposed to increase generalization
and robustness of deep networks [50, 44]. Instead of training on original dataset, the network is
trained on convex combination of images with targets mixed in the same way. We adapt mixup to
knowledge distillation as follows: on each iteration we construct random pairs of inputs x, x′ from
the training set and mix them as λ · x + (1 −λ) · x′, where the coefﬁcient λ is sampled uniformly on
[0, 1]5.
Synthetic GAN-generated images
We use a Spectral Normalization GAN (SN-GAN) trained on
CIFAR-100 [35] to generate synthetic data for distillation. We used the same pretrained SN-GAN
(FID = 74.2617, IS = 6.6023) for all experiments. Our synthetic augmentation procedure was the
following: for each minibatch of real training data, we concatenated synthetic images sampled from a
pretrained SN-GAN at a ratio of 1 synthetic image to 4 real images.
Random noise
To observe the effect of unnatural images in the distillation dataset we augment
with images sampled pixel-wise from uniform [0, 1]d. During distillation each image in a minibatch
is randomly resampled with probability p = 0.2.
Out-of-domain data
Finally, we consider using images from the SVHN dataset [37] which is
semantically unrelated to the target CIFAR-100 dataset.
We use the torchvision.transoforms package [39] to implement the augmentations from the
Baseline Augmentations and Conventional Image Transformations categories:
• Horizontal ﬂips: torchvision.transforms.RandomHorizontalFlip()
• Random
shifts:
torchvision.transforms.RandomCrop(size=<input_size>,
padding=4)
• Vertical ﬂips: torchvision.transforms.RandomVerticalFlip()
• Color
jitter:
torchvision.transforms.ColorJitter(brightness=0.2,
contrast=0.2, saturation=0.2, hue=0.2)
• Random rotations: torchvision.transforms.RandomRotation(degrees=20)
A.2
Network architectures
Image classiﬁers
For experiments on CIFAR-100 we used preactivation ResNets with batchnorm,
skip connections [18], and the standard three-stage macro-structure, varying the number of layers
in each stage (i.e. the depth of the network). For all choices of depth we used the same number
of ﬁlters in each stage (16, 32, and 64, respectively). In Section C.2 we use a VGG-16 network
5Note that unlike in the original mixup procedure we are only mixing the inputs and we use the predictions
of the teacher on the mixed inputs as the target for the student.
14



===== PAGE 15 =====

Figure 7: Sample images from our SN-GAN (FID = 74.2617, IS = 6.6023) trained on CIFAR-100.
without batch-normalization, with implementation directly adapted from https://github.com/
pytorch/vision/blob/master/torchvision/models/vgg.py. For experiments on MNIST
and EMNIST we used a 5-layer LeNet [28]. For ImageNet we used ResNet50 networks for both
teacher and students.
Image generators
We used the standard three-stage ResNet architectures for the SN-GAN gener-
ator and discriminator from Miyato et al. [35]. The generator latent dimension was 128, and each
generator stage had 256 ﬁlters. The discriminator had 128 ﬁlters in each stage. Sample images are
shown in Figure 7.
Text classiﬁer
In section C.4 on IMDB sentimental analysis problem, we use a bidirectional LSTM
recurrent neural network with 2 layers, embedding size 128 and LSTM cell size 70.
A.3
Training procedures
In our experiments, we consider pre-activation ResNet networks with depths 20, 56 and 110 [18].
We evaluate on MNIST/EMNIST [11] and CIFAR-100 [27], focusing primarily on the latter. We
chose CIFAR-100 rather than CIFAR-10 because increasing the problem difﬁculty increases the gap
in performance between a single model and an ensemble, making signiﬁcant trends more apparent.
We independently train each network in the teacher-ensemble to minimize LNLL for 200 epochs, and
we distill each student by training it to minimize LKD for 300 epochs (i.e. we take α in Ls to be
0). Note that in the literature one typically sees α > 0. We have chosen α = 0 so that our objective
reﬂects our aim of producing the highest ﬁdelity student possible. We use an SGD optimizer with
initial learning rate 5 × 10−2 and cosine annealing learning rate schedule. We produce augmented
datasets for distillation by sampling images from a set of speciﬁed sources, including rotations or
color jitter applied to ground truth images, uniform ‘white noise’ images, or synthetic GAN-generated
images. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, the only augmentations applied when training the teacher were
the standard random horizontal ﬂip (p = 0.5) and padded random crop (4 pixel pad width), regardless
of the choice of distillation dataset.
Teacher image classiﬁers:
The teacher models were trained through the standard empirical cross-
entropy loss for 200 epochs with a batch size of 256 using SGD with momentum (0.9 momentum
weight) and weight decay of 1.0 × 10−4. We used a cosine annealing learning rate schedule with
ηmax = 0.1, ηmin = 0. For data augmentation we used random horizontal ﬂips (p = 0.5) and random
crops (padding width 4).
Student image classiﬁers:
Our student models were distilled through the temperature-scaled
teacher-student cross-entropy with varying temperatures τ for 300 epochs, with a batch size of 128
using SGD with Nesterov momentum (0.9 momentum weight) and weight decay of 1.0 × 10−4. We
used a cosine annealing learning rate schedule with ηmax = 5.0 × 10−2, ηmin = 1.0 × 10−6. For
details on the data augmentation procudures we considered, the reader is directed to Appendix A.1.
Image generators:
For synthetic image generation we trained SN-GAN models with the hinge
discriminator loss from Miyato et al. [35]. We trained the generator for 100K gradient steps with
a batch size of 128. For each generator step, we took 5 discriminator steps. We used Adam
(β1 = 0, β2 = 0.9) and a linearly decayed learning rate ηmax = 2.0 × 10−4, ηmin = 1.0 × 10−6.
15



===== PAGE 16 =====

We used random horizontal ﬂips (p = 0.5) as data augmentation for the discriminator. To evaluate
FID and IS scores, we used 5K samples from the generator and the pretrained PyTorch Inception-v3
networks6. For the discriminator and generator architectures the reader is referred to Appendix A.2.
Text classiﬁers:
For text classiﬁcation on IMDB dataset, we train LSTM networks for 100 epochs
with learning rate 10−2, weight decay 10−3 and batch size 100 sequences. For the data loader, we
use 100 as maximum sequence length and ﬁlter out tokens in the vocabulary that are present less than
10 times.
ImageNet experiments:
we trained the teachers with weight decay 10−4 and did not use weight
decay for training the students. We trained both the teachers and the students for 90 epochs using the
SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9 and a cosine decay learning rate schedule with a linear learning
rate ramp-up for 5 epochs to the initial value of 0.1. We used a batch size of 1024.
B
Additional understanding experiments
In this section we include additional experimental results that were not included in the main text in
the interest of clarity, but are still noteworthy to those seeking a deep understanding of the behavior
of knowledge distillation.
B.1
Understanding the effect of teacher capacity on the distillation labels
In this subsection, we explore the qualitative effect of teacher ensemble size, network depth, and
distillation temperature on the predictive distributions on train and test, to get a better understanding
of what the students are being asked to emulate.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Class Probability
ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Class Probability
3×ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Class Probability
5×ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Class Probability
ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Class Probability
3×ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Class Probability
5×ResNet-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Class Probability
ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Class Probability
3×ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Class Probability
5×ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Class Probability
ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Class Probability
3×ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Class Probability
5×ResNet-56
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Class Probability
ResNet-110
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Class Probability
3×ResNet-110
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Class Probability
5×ResNet-110
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Class Probability
ResNet-110
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Class Probability
3×ResNet-110
0
20
40
60
80
100
Class id
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Class Probability
5×ResNet-110
(a) Train Data
(b) Test Data
Figure 8: Teacher predictive distributions for example images from CIFAR-100 train (left) and test
(right). For train examples we show the distribution when τ = 1 in blue and the tempered distribution
when τ = 4 in green. For test examples we only show τ = 1. Each row corresponds to a different
teacher depth, and the column corresponds to the number of ensemble components.
Since deep ensemble components are typically large networks that achieve almost 100% accuracy
on train with very high conﬁdence, it is tempting to assume that each ensemble component conveys
effectively the same information when used for distillation. One consequence of that assumption
would be that adding ensemble components would produce little or no improvement in the student if
the distillation was performed on train. In fact, we ﬁnd that although the component networks are
indeed very conﬁdent on the train, there is sufﬁcient variation in their predictive distributions for
the student to beneﬁt signiﬁcantly. In Figure 8 we provide examples of teacher logits, varying the
ensemble size, network depth, and temperature, comparing examples from CIFAR-100 train and test.
As discussed in Section 3.1 in order to beneﬁt from soft teacher labels, one must choose τ large
enough that the student directs some capacity towards mimicking the smaller teacher logits (Figure
6https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/torchvision/models.html?highlight=inception#
torchvision.models.inception_v3
16



===== PAGE 17 =====

4, bottom). If τ is chosen too small (e.g. τ = 1), then the student distilled from a 3-component
ResNet56 ensemble is no better than a student distilled from a single network. The improvements in
student performance and ﬁdelity taper off fairly quickly as ensemble components are added.
1
4
8
16
Temperature
1
3
5
59.38
59.65
60.25
61.33
62.78
63.21
59.87
62.12
62.18
59.16
61.38
61.45
Test Accuracy
1
4
8
16
Temperature
1
3
5
58.04
63.91
67.16
65.31
72.77
74.77
65.24
72.38
75.32
65.27
71.56
74.92
Test Agreement
Figure 9: Subsampled CIFAR-100 experiment performed with ResNet20 networks. ResNet20
networks are much less conﬁdent on train than ResNet56 networks. As a result increasing the
ensemble size will improve the student even with a small temperature setting τ = 1.
The correct choice of τ depends on the level of conﬁdence the teacher has on train. ResNet56
networks achieve nearly 100% accuracy on train with high conﬁdence, so a temperature like τ = 4
works well. When ResNet20 networks are used (networks which are not capable of perfectly ﬁtting
CIFAR-100), we see that lower temperatures can be used, although τ = 4 still outperforms other
choices (Figure 9). The reason lower temperatures work with ResNet20 teachers on CIFAR-100 is
because ResNet20 networks do not attain 100% accuracy on train, so the teacher logits are much less
sharply peaked (see also Figure 8, top row).
2
4
6
8
10
12
Teacher Size
70
72
74
76
78
Test Accuracy
Student
Teacher
2
4
6
8
10
12
Teacher Size
77.5
80.0
82.5
85.0
87.5
Test Agreement
Figure 10: The effect on accuracy (left) and agreement (right) of the number of models (m) in
the teacher ensemble (α = 0, τ = 1). Student accuracy quickly saturates as m increases, despite
continuing improvements in teacher accuracy. The teacher-student agreement continues to improve
after the accuracy has saturated.
B.2
Understanding the effect of teacher ensemble size on distillation
In Figure 10 we demonstrate the effect of increasing the number (m) of teacher ensemble ResNet56
components on test accuracy and agreement. In the main text we only considered teacher ensembles
with up to 5 components – here we provide results for up to 12 components. Although it is plausible
that ensembles with more components would have more complex predictive distributions that would
be difﬁcult for a single student to match, in reality we see the exact opposite. Deep ensembles with
more components are easier to emulate (indicated by higher agreement). One possible explanation is
that adding more ensemble components smooths the logits of unlikely classes, making the distribution
easier to match. Closer investigation into this phenomenon could potentially yield insights into how
to improve distillation ﬁdelity in general.
In agreement with the results on self-distillation [13, 36], we see that the student is more accurate
than the teacher when m = 1. However the accuracy of the student does not substantially improve as
we increase the number m of models in the teacher ensemble past 4, even though both the accuracy
of the teacher and the teacher-student agreement continue to increase monotonically with m.
B.3
Detailed results for distillation with heavy data augmentation
In Figure 11 we report more detailed results for the experiment in Figure 3 (in the main text). In
particular, for the sake of simplicity we only reported results for m = 5 in the main text. Here we
report results for m = 1 and m = 3 as well for comparison.
17



===== PAGE 18 =====

1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Baseline
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
Baseline
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Baseline
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
Test Agreement
Baseline
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
Baseline
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Baseline(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
Baseline(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Baseline(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
Test Agreement
Baseline(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.6
0.8
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
Baseline(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Rotation
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
Rotation
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Rotation
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
Test Agreement
Rotation
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Test KL(T||S)
Rotation
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Vertical Flip
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
Vertical Flip
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Vertical Flip
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
Test Agreement
Vertical Flip
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Test KL(T||S)
Vertical Flip
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
ColorJitter
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
ColorJitter
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
ColorJitter
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
Test Agreement
ColorJitter
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Test KL(T||S)
ColorJitter
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Combined Augs
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
Combined Augs
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Combined Augs
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.75
0.80
0.85
Test Agreement
Combined Augs
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Test KL(T||S)
Combined Augs
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
MixUp
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
MixUp
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
MixUp
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
Test Agreement
MixUp
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Test KL(T||S)
MixUp
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
MixUp(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
MixUp(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
MixUp(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.75
0.80
0.85
Test Agreement
MixUp(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
MixUp(T = 4)
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
OOD
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
OOD
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
OOD
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
Test Agreement
OOD
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
OOD
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
Noise
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
Noise
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
Noise
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Agreement
Noise
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.9
1.0
1.1
Test KL(T||S)
Noise
Student
Ind Baseline
Teacher
Figure 11: Detailed results for the experiment in Section 5.1. Each row corresponds to a different
augmentation procedure, and each column is a different evaluation metric. Notably, we see that the
student distilled with mixup and τ = 1 is the best overall in terms of NLL (though not test accuracy)
beating even the teacher-ensemble for all values of m. The independent baseline serves as a reference
to aid in the interpretation of ﬁdelity metrics.
C
Addressing alternative causes of poor ﬁdelity
In this section we provide evidence contrary to other possible explanations of low student ﬁdelity
posited in Section 4.4. In section C.1 we demonstrate that increasing student capacity does not
substantially improve ﬁdelity. We also show that poor distillation ﬁdelity is not speciﬁc to neural
network architecture, dataset scale and data domain, and is observed for VGG networks (section C.2),
larger-scale ImageNet dataset (section C.3) and IMDB sentiment analysis classiﬁcation with LSTM
networks (section C.4). Further, in section C.5 we demonstrate that the common practice of showing
the student both the real labels (when available) and the teacher labels tends to decrease ﬁdelity.
18



===== PAGE 19 =====

C.1
Capacity: is the student capable of emulating the teacher?
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
Test Accuracy
ResNet-20→ResNet-20
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
ResNet-20→ResNet-20
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
ResNet-20→ResNet-20
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.675
0.700
0.725
0.750
Test Agreement
ResNet-20→ResNet-20
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
ResNet-20→ResNet-20
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
Test Accuracy
ResNet-20→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
ResNet-20→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
ResNet-20→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.70
0.75
0.80
Test Agreement
ResNet-20→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.4
0.6
0.8
Test KL(T||S)
ResNet-20→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
ResNet-56→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test NLL
ResNet-56→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
ResNet-56→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
Test Agreement
ResNet-56→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Test KL(T||S)
ResNet-56→ResNet-56
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.72
0.74
0.76
Test Accuracy
ResNet-56→ResNet-110
1
3
5
Teacher size
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Test NLL
ResNet-56→ResNet-110
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.05
0.10
0.15
Test ECE
ResNet-56→ResNet-110
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
Test Agreement
ResNet-56→ResNet-110
1
3
5
Teacher size
0.6
0.7
0.8
Test KL(T||S)
ResNet-56→ResNet-110
Student
Ind Baseline
Teacher
Figure 12: Here we show the effect of increasing the student capacity, holding the teacher capacity
ﬁxed. The top two rows correspond to ResNet20 teacher-ensemble components with ResNet20 and
ResNet56 students, respectively. The bottom two rows are similarly ResNet56 teacher components
with ResNet56 and ResNet110 students. The column corresponds to the evaluation metric. Increasing
student capacity from 20 to 56 provides some beneﬁt to both accuracy and ﬁdelity, but increasing
student capacity from 56 to 110 improves only accuracy.
One possible cause of low student ﬁdelity when distilling ResNet ensembles on CIFAR-100 is
that a single student network does not have capacity to perfectly emulate an ensemble of multiple
networks. This explanation is already rendered unlikely by our similar observations in the context of
self-distillation. Nevertheless in Figure 12 we demonstrate the effect of increasing student capacity
beyond that of the individual teacher components as additional contrary evidence to the capacity
explanation. Increasing the student capacity does slightly improve ﬁdelity – doubling the student
network depth results in a 2% to 3% improvement in test agreement. If capacity were a primary cause
of low ﬁdelity, we would expect a much larger effect on distillation ﬁdelity when the student capacity
is signiﬁcantly increased.
C.2
Architecture: is low ﬁdelity an artifact of using ResNets?
Another possible explanation of low student ﬁdelity in our experiments is our choice of network
architecture. ResNet-style backbones are ubiquitous across most computer vision tasks, so even
were the issue restricted to ResNets it would merit close investigation. Nevertheless, in the interest
of empirical rigor we repeat the augmentation ablation in Section 5.1 with VGG networks and a
subset of the augmentation policies. In Figure 13, the teacher is a 5-component ensemble of VGG-16
networks trained with the Baseline augmentation policy (horizontal ﬂips and random crops). We
report the student accuracy, negative log-likelihood and teacher-student agreement for a VGG-16
student trained with different data augmentation policies.
The results are generally analogous to the ones for ResNet-56 presented in Section 5.1. The CombAug
augmentation strategy underperforms all other strategies, including Baseline, on student accuracy,
but provides the best results on NLL and only slightly loses to MixUp on teacher-student agreement.
19



===== PAGE 20 =====

Baseline
Rotation
VertFlip
ColorJit
CombAug
MixUp
0.72
0.74
0.76
Accuracy
Baseline
Rotation
VertFlip
ColorJit
CombAug
MixUp
1.0
1.5
NLL
Baseline
Rotation
VertFlip
ColorJit
CombAug
MixUp
0.800
0.825
0.850
Agreement
Figure 13: Test accuracy, negative log-likelihood and teacher-student agreement when distilling
a 5-component VGG-16 teacher ensemble into a VGG-16 student on CIFAR-100 with varying
augmentation policies. The best performing policy is shown in green, results averaged over 3 runs
and error bars indicate ±σ. The results are generally analogous to the results for the ResNet-56
architecture reported in Section 5.1. MixUp and ColorJit provide the best student accuracy, while
CombAug provides the best NLL. CombAug and MixUp provide the best teacher-student agreement.
This result again highlights that the best augmentation policies for generalization do not necessarily
provide the best distillation ﬁdelity. Finally, regardless of the augmentation strategy, the agreement
on test does not exceed 85%.
C.3
Dataset: does increasing the scale of the dataset increase ﬁdelity?
We provide the results for distilling ensembles of 1, 3 and 5 ResNet-50 teachers into a single ResNet-
50 model in Table 2. For each setting, we report the results averaged over 3 independent runs. The
results further validate our CIFAR-100 experiments. In particular, top-1 agreement is again in the
80 −90% range, adding more ensemble components to the teacher improves student accuracy and
ﬁdelity, and both the accuracy and ﬁdelity gap between teacher and student can be observed.
Dataset
Teach. Size
Teach. Acc. (↑)
Stud. Acc. (↑)
Agree. (↑)
KL (↓)
IMDB
1
79.361 (0.132)
80.353 (0.198)
86.488 (0.521)
0.124 (0.012)
3
81.807 (0.129)
81.129 (0.057)
89.832 (0.349)
0.064 (0.003)
5
82.216 (0.207)
81.167 (0.196)
90.793 (0.180)
0.052 (0.001)
ImageNet
1
0.748 (0.001)
0.753 (0.001)
0.855 (0.001)
0.217 (0.002)
3
0.764 (0.001)
0.755 (0.001)
0.878 (0.001)
0.157 (0.001)
5
0.767 (0.001)
0.756 (0.001)
0.884 (0.001)
0.142 (0.001)
Table 2: Distillation results when the dataset is varied. All metrics are computed on the test set. We
used bidirectional LSTM networks for IMDB and ResNet-56 networks for CIFAR-100 and ImageNet.
Across all datasets we see the following consistent behavior: 1) larger teacher ensembles are more
accurate and easier to distill, and 2) teacher-student disagree on at least 10% of test points.
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
71.00
71.25
71.50
71.75
72.00
Test Accuracy
ResNet-56
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
72.4
72.5
72.6
72.7
Test Agreement
ResNet-56
(a) 1 Teacher
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
72
73
74
75
Test Accuracy
3×ResNet-56
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
76.4
76.6
76.8
77.0
77.2
Test Agreement
3×ResNet-56
(b) 3 Teachers
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
72
73
74
75
76
Test Accuracy
5×ResNet-56
0 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
α
77.50
77.75
78.00
78.25
78.50
Test Agreement
5×ResNet-56
(c) 5 Teachers
Figure 14: Results ablating α (τ = 1). Taking α > 0 can improve student accuracy in the self-
distillation regime, but does not consistently improve teacher-student agreement. When k > 0 there
is a slight beneﬁt at α = 0.1, after which the effect is negative for both accuracy and agreement.
C.4
Data domain: is low ﬁdelity speciﬁc to image classiﬁcation?
To expand out results beyond the image domain, we also demonstrate the knowledge distillation
results when distilling LSTM text classiﬁers on IMDB sentiment analysis data in Table 2. We distill
ensembles of 2-layer bidirectional LSTM teachers into a single bidirectional LSTM of the same
architecture. Note that like in our other results, the teacher accuracy is strictly improving, whereas
20



===== PAGE 21 =====

the student accuracy ceases to improve from 3 to 5 teacher ensemble components, which is associated
with a similar lack of improvement in agreement.
C.5
Does showing the student ground truth labels improve ﬁdelity?
In Figure 14 we investigate the effect of the relative weight of the distillation loss terms LNLL and
LKD when distilling teacher-ensembles with ResNet56 components into a ResNet56 student on
CIFAR-100 with τ = 1. We observe that in the self-distillation regime taking α > 0 improves test
accuracy, but not test agreement. When k > 0, there is a slight beneﬁt when α = 0.1, but for most
values tried the effect was deleterious to both accuracy and ﬁdelity.
21
