Page 13 of 34
Misrak and Melaku Discover Internet of Things            (2025) 5:97 
3.4.1  Redundancy-adjusted logistic MIFS
Employing Redundancy-Adjusted Logistic MIFS (RAL-MIFS) enhances feature engi­
neering for cyber attack Identification Systems by refining MIFS. By adjusting for feature 
redundancy and leveraging logistic weighting, RAL-MIFS prioritizes the most informa­
tive features. This approach improves the efficacy and accuracy of ADS, ensuring better 
detection of attacks in complex datasets.
As stated in [9], MIFS is a popular system for feature identification that can effec­
tively choose important features aside from data distribution, which makes best for 
early attack detection architecture where data have no sufficient attack patterns. Unlike 
existing MIFS that calculate k using Eq. (2), we proposeed RAL-MIFS that calculate the 
redundancy using Eq. (3). Rather than updating k value linearly, the RAL-MIFS gradu­
ally rise weights whenever a new attributes is appended to the dataset.
k = 1
|S|

(2)
k =
1
1 + e−( |S|
|F |
)

(3)
where k is the redundancy coefficient, |S| is count of features in the chosen dataset and 
|F| is the number of features in the original dataset. Principal Component Analysis 
has emerged as the prevailing method for feature reduction in prior research on attack 
detection systems, offering enhanced lightweight performance via its low-complex­
ity linear transformation approach. Variants of PCA have been extensively applied for 
reduction of feature dimensionality in attack detection datasets, reflecting its ongoing 
relevance. In such contexts, full-fledged training data may not be acquired at once, and 
gradual increase in data traffic may lead to subtle alterations in cyber attack behavior 
from the dataset. Consequently, features extracted from initially provided training sam­
ples may lack persuasiveness, underscoring the desire for more adaptable and efficient 
feature reduction techniques in dynamic IoT settings.
3.4.2  Two stage IPCA
This study also introduces the two-stage IPCA for Detecting and classifying cyber 
attacks, as a improvement for the PCA algorithm. IPCA, an incremental learning-based 
reduction of feature dimensionality method suggested by [44], facilitates the incremen­
tal updating of feature vectors and values. Below is a concise outline of the reduction of 
dimensionality principle employed by the IPCA algorithm [44]. The high dimensional 
data samples will be denoted as X = [x1, x2, . . . , xm] ∈Rn×m in an n-dimensional 
space, and mean of X will be computed from that. MX(¯X, Uk, Λk) is the eigenspace 
model of the raw dataset. Consider the new sample data Z ∈Rn will be upgraded to the 
the sample data of original; then, ¯X the initial model eigenspace will be upgraded to ¯X
′, 
where
¯X
′ =
1
N + 1
N
∑
i=1
(¯XN + Z) ∈Rn.
(4)
where Uk is n × k matrix, and k represents the feature dimension space, with the matrix 
columns representing the data’s feature vectors. Λk represents k × k dimension matrix 
