Page 22 of 34
Misrak and Melaku Discover Internet of Things            (2025) 5:97 
reduce CIC-IDS2017 dataset features from 78 to 26 features while maintaining an accu­
racy of 99.753%
Experimental results shows that the RAL-MIFS with two-stage IPCA method sig­
nificantly enhances the detection efficiency of cyber attacks. Specifically, by reducing 
CIC-IDS2017 dataset features from 78 to 26, the RA-MIFS + two-stage IPCA method 
achieves an accuracy of 99.753%, outperforming single stage RAL-MIFS + IPCA tech­
niques. This substantial improvement underscores the effectiveness of the RAL-MIFS + 
two-stage IPCA method in extracting the most vital features and thereby enhancing the 
performance of cyber attack detection of the model and its generalizablity.
Practically speaking, the experiments validate the performance superiority of RAL-
MIFS + two-stage IPCA over RAL-MIFS + IPCA, indicating its effectiveness in intru­
sion detection scenarios. Furthermore, this study conducts a comparison of the optimal 
identification efficacy of RAL-MIFS + two stage IPCA reduction algorithms using CIC-
IDS2017 dataset, wherein the two-stage IPCA algorithm surpasses others regarding 
precision, accuracy, recall, and F1-score. A comprehensive performance comparison 
is depicted in Fig. 4. In summary, the RAL-MIFS + two-stage IPCA algorithm chosen 
in this research outperforms widely used feature engineering technique in the test and 
demonstrates outstanding performance.
4.2.2  Performance measures on CIC-IDS2017 dataset
To ascertain the applicability of our proposed architecture for IoT attack recognition, 
this subsection undertakes a comparative analysis between the DNN-BiLSTMQ model 
and its constituent sub-models, namely DNN and BiLSTM, through rigorous experi­
mentation. Furthermore, it juxtaposes our model against a spectrum of widely used DL 
models across several performance parameters, including accuracy, recall, precision, 
F1-score, time of training and time of inference. The results of these comparative experi­
ments are meticulously documented in Table 4. Given the inherent complexities of ML 
models, particularly in terms of training and inference times. For the data partitioning 
procedure, data is randomly divided into into 80 % training, 20% testing, and then fur­
ther divide the training set to training and validation 80% and 20% respectively. Finally, 
data was fed to deep learning model. The result is based on optimization parameters: 
batch_size: 148, lr: 0.0018895 weight_decay: 1.44357 × 10−5. These hyperparameters 
Fig. 4  Comparison of RAL-MIFS + IPCA/RAL-MIFS + Two stage IPCA
 
