Page 4 of 34
Misrak and Melaku Discover Internet of Things            (2025) 5:97 
methodologies. CNNs and RNNs were used to extract complex patterns from IoT net­
work traffic, significantly enhancing attack detection accuracy.
[21] Proposed improved feature selection method named Logistic Redundancy Coef­
ficient Gradual Upweighting MIFS that assesses individual features instead of checking 
them with same characteristics of the already selected features. In contrast to other fea­
ture selection methods currently in use, logistic function was used to determine a fea­
ture’s redundancy score.
[8] Used incremental principal component analysis (IPCA) techniques for feature 
dimension reduction. IPCA learn incrementally data features and is more convenient for 
real-time monitoring of the network traffic within IoT environment.
A novel feature engineering strategy and DCNN-based model for identifying evil-
intended attacks in Internet of Things networks are presented by [6]. Optimizing per­
formance while lowering computational power was the goal. The suggested model 
successfully lowers computing power while increasing performance. For binary classifi­
cation, they get 98.12%, and for multiclassification of 77.0% accuracy.
Additionally, recent advancements in this field include the work of [22], who proposed 
a unique feature engineering strategy based on the algorithm GNNs for IoT cyber attack 
detection. Their method effectively captures the complex relationships and dependen­
cies among IoT devices and their communications, thereby enhancing the robustness 
and accuracy of cyber attack recognition in IoT environments.
2.3  Lightweight cyber attack detection model
Much effort has been expended over the past ten years to address security problems are 
connected to detecting cyber attacks in IoT systems. Many of these anomaly-based ADS 
systems are developed employing machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) tech­
niques to enable intelligent cyber security decisions.
Thus, feature preprocessing and data engineering formed the central part of the DL-
based ADS model. This has been crucial in enabling the raw data gathered within the 
ecosystem of IoT to be analyzed and predicted further [23]. They found highly encourag­
ing results by applying model of deep neural network on two chosen IoT gateways, with 
an average increase in network bandwidth of less than 30 kb/s and a CPU consumption 
increase of only 2%. On the two datasets that were used, the ML models were able to 
show almost 93% detection accuracy and 92% f1-score [24].
[8] Employed dynamic quantization to trim specified model cell structure, thereby 
reduce the computational complication on devices while maintaining accurate detection 
ablity.
Additionally, the study by [25] used a multi-stage classification method by applying 
clustering with oversampling to analyze the same dataset and predict the intrusion’s 
existence. It merely recognizes the presence of attacks; it cannot, however, forecast the 
kind of the attacks. When feature/data engineering techniques are not used, it can often 
be more challenging to extract pertinent features using DL algorithms alone. Industry 
businesses and researchers have created techniques to classify the data and identify 
assaults by identifying important characteristics.
IoT traffic usually requires a huge amount of memory space and data capacity. How­
ever, putting cyber attack-detection and classification systems by high-performance 
deep learning techniques based on IoT devices can be difficult in some situations due 
