Page 11 of 34
Misrak and Melaku Discover Internet of Things            (2025) 5:97 
maintaining a representative distribution across all subsets. After we normalize the data­
set, each matrix value will have a value between zero and one. For the data partitioning 
procedure, data is randomly divided into into 80 % training, 20% testing, and then fur­
ther divide the training set to training and validation 80% and 20% respectively. Finally, 
data was fed to deep learning model.
3.3  Proposed lightweighting architecture
In recent years, the demand for lightweight and efficient cyber attack detection systems 
has surged due to the proliferation of IoT devices of constrained processing capabilities. 
However, existing models often fall short in meeting these requirements, as they entail 
high computational costs and are unsuitable for widespread deployment. The emer­
gence of CNN, BiLSTM and DNN has shown promise in addressing these challenges, 
yet research in this area remains limited. While CNN-based classifiers excel in managing 
diverse datasets, their application in attack detection has only recently gained traction, 
outperforming traditional approaches [42]. To capitalize on this advancement, our study 
proposes an innovative model that integrates a DNN with BiLSTM, showcasing excep­
tional performance in identifying various network anomalies and malicious assaults. 
Despite the outstanding performance of BILSTM and DNN, our hybrid approach offers 
a robust solution for lightweight cyber attack recognition in IoT environments [43].
In this investigation, a lightweight deep learning-based neural network cyber attack 
identification and classification scheme that incorporates RAL-MIFS + two stage feature 
dimension reduction and advanced dynamic model quantization is proposed to stream­
line the detection model complication. The outcome is a model that maintains low com­
putational complication while achieving best detection accuracy.
The following are the phases of the suggested method for detecting IoT attacks: First, 
as explained in Sect 3.2.2, the IoT cyber attack detection and classification dataset is pre­
processed through data encoding or numerization, data cleaning, feature engineering 
(RAL-MIFS), and two stage IPCA algorithm. The preprocessed data was divided to test, 
training, and validation category. The test set confirms the final model’s classification 
performance, while the training and validation data are utilized for training the model 
and weight fine tuning. After that, training and validation data are fed into DNN-BiL­
STM model and quantization aware training was performed.
To determine the proper parameters of the proposed system, the hyperparameters of 
the model are then optimized using the optuna optimization techniques. The trained 
optimal model is then subjected to advanced dynamic quantization (Quantization Aware 
Training and Post training dynamic quantization) by means of structural unit specifica­
tions. The quantized DNN-BiLSTMQ model is generated, and the ultimate identifica­
tion performance of the final model is assessed through rigorous testing of the reduced 
size quantized model with the designated test set.
The proposed general architecture of lightweight deep learning based IoT cyber attack 
identification and categorization method is illustrated in Fig. 1, comprising four main 
modules: data preprocessing, quantization aware model training and weight fine tuning, 
post training model dynamic quantization, and model categorization testing. This com­
prehensive architecture aims to enhance intrusion detection efficiency while minimiz­
ing computational resources, ensuring effective protection against cyber attack in IoT 
environments.
