Page 3 of 34
Misrak and Melaku Discover Internet of Things            (2025) 5:97 
incorporates robust feature engineering methods, including RAL-MIFS and a two-stage 
IPCA, to reduce dataset dimensionality by extracting the most relevant features. By min­
imizing model size and reducing false positives, this research strengthens the resilience 
and reliability of IoT networks against emerging cyber threats, ensuring efficient and 
precise attack detection and categorization.
2  Related work
2.1  Cyber attack detection for IoT
The proliferation of computers, smartphones, and other internet-enabled devices has 
made the world vulnerable to cyber attacks. confidentiality and safety challenges are also 
evolving and increasing as the IoT touches everyone every day [10, 11]. Additionally, the 
security threats exposed by IoT devices have varying impacts depending on the domain 
in which they operate. Each device can suffer from unique vulnerabilities specific to the 
characteristics, processes, and requirements of its domain, such as smart grids, indus­
trial applications, and autonomous vehicles, smart home, healthcare, smart city.
The continued rise in information leaks and attacks from IoT devices has led to an 
acceleration and increase in privacy and security research in the literature [12, 13]. 
Therefore, the need for early detection of intrusive activity to mitigate the negative 
impact of these devices is more urgent than ever. As a result, standard intrusion detec­
tion techniques are being improved by incorporating machine learning techniques [14–
16]. [17] a proposed network traffic analyzer and machine learning approach to prevent 
botnet attacks.
[14] made use of the perks of swarm intelligence (SI) techniques to present a novel 
feature engineering strategy for the attack recognition system. BoT-IoT, NSL-KDD, 
CIC2017, and KDD99 are well-known public datasets that were utilized to assess the 
efficacy of the suggested cyber attack detection method. For cyber attack detection, 
three sophisticated and popular DL models were proposed by [18]. CNN, LSTM, and 
a CNN-LSTM hybrid model experiment were carried out by the authors. They assessed 
these DL models usage of the IoTID20 dataset. Conventional network attack detection 
techniques can be effectively enhanced with machine learning technology.
As per [19], a novel hybrid intrusion detection system (HIDS) called Hybrid CRNN 
attack Detection System (HCRNNIDS) has been introduced, employing convolutional 
recurrent neural network. This system integrate the strengths of convolutional neural 
networks (CNNs) for extraction of local features and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) 
for capturing temporal features. By harnessing these techniques, the HCRNNIDS dem­
onstrates significant advancements in cyber attack detection, achieving remarkable 
accuracy rates of 97.75% in detecting malicious cyber attacks on the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 
dataset under 10-fold cross-validation. This innovative approach outperforms conven­
tional cyber-attack detection methodologies, marking a substantial stride towards more 
effective cybersecurity measures in network environments.
2.2  Improved feature engineering for cyber attack detection on IoT
Feature engineering is indispensable in the realm of cyber threat detection within 
the IoT environments, as it aids in extracting relevant information from raw data, 
thereby enabling the development of simple and accurate detection systems. Recent 
research [20], investigated feature engineering techniques leveraging deep learning 
