Page 5 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
	
Another common explanation method, grounded in cooperative game theory, is SHAP 
(SHapley Additive exPlanation) [30]. The method computes the contribution of each fea-
ture to the predicted outcome using the Shapley value, which is a measure that fairly 
distributes the credit among a set of players (i.e., the input features) contributing to a 
certain outcome (i.e., the model prediction). Integrated Gradients (IG) [31] is a model-
specific explanation method that calculates feature attributions to the prediction by 
accumulating gradients along a path from a baseline instance to the specific instance of 
interest. By using integration, IG captures the sensitivity of the model’s output to varia-
tions in each input feature, revealing influential features for a given prediction.
Besides using XAI methods to provide the user with useful insights into the ration-
ale behind the model decision process, some attempts have been made in the field of 
Explanation-Guided Learning (EGL) to investigate how explanations can be leveraged to 
improve the learning process of deep models [32]. As an example, Nigisetty et al. [9] pro-
posed xAI-GANs, a new class of Generative Adversarial Networks that incorporate local 
explanations of the classification made by the discriminator into the gradient descent 
process to provide richer corrective feedback to the generator. Zeng et al. [33] proposed 
a method to generate end-to-end attributional explanations for deep networks, leverag-
ing attribution maps from an adversarially trained counterpart model to supervise the 
learned explanations. Another method was proposed by Alharbi et al. [10], consisting of 
leveraging convolutional autoencoders to transfer both the knowledge and explanations 
from a teacher to a student, represented by Convolutional Neural Networks at different 
scales.
Proposed method
The proposed method, namely DiXtill, provides a novel approach to distilling knowl-
edge from LLMs into lightweight neural architectures, thus easing the deployment on 
resource-constrained devices. As depicted in Fig. 1, the main idea behind DiXtill is to 
leverage local explanations provided by an Explainer as a complement to the usual pre-
diction-based supervision, to guide the distillation process of a Teacher LLM into a Self-
explainable student.
The teacher is an LLM based on the Transformer  [34] architecture, such as BERT 
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers)  [35] and GPT (Generative 
Pre-trained Transformer) [36]. The student model is a bi-directional Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM), which generates both a classification and an explanation via masked 
attention. In the following sections, the architecture of the self-explainable student 
network and the distillation process will be delineated in detail, describing how expla-
nations are transferred from the teacher to enhance both the effectiveness and interpret-
ability of the distilled student.
Self‑explainable student model architecture
The student model consists of a bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory network 
enhanced with masked attention. The use of such a mechanism allows for improv-
ing classification performance and provides interpretability, by dynamically assigning 
weights to individual input words in proportion to their significance for the model’s 
classification.
