Page 4 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
Tang et al. [15] proposed a method to distill knowledge from BERT into a single-layer 
bi-directional LSTM, demonstrating comparable performance to the original network 
without external training data or additional input features. Quantization involves reduc-
ing the precision of model parameters (e.g., weights and activations from 32-bit floating-
point values to 8-bit integers) to achieve smaller memory footprints and faster inference 
times. Generally, a deep neural model can be quantized using two main approaches: 
Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) and Quantization-Aware Training (QAT)  [19]. The 
former quantizes the model parameters after training without modifying its underly-
ing architecture, while the latter integrates quantization into the model’s training pro-
cess, allowing it to adapt to low-precision representations and ensuring higher accuracy 
compared to PTQ. However, since QAT methods cannot easily scale to large models 
like LLMs [20], common PTQ-based algorithms are generally used in the case of LLMs, 
including Activation-aware Weight Quantization (AWQ) [20], GPTQ [21], and dynamic 
quantization, which computes the range for each activation based on the data range 
observed at runtime. Finally, another common method for the compression of large 
models is pruning, which aims to reduce the size of the model by removing unneces-
sary network elements. This technique can be applied in an unstructured manner [4], 
by removing individual weights to build an irregular sparse structure, or in a structured 
one [22], by removing high-granularity components of the network, such as neurons, 
channels, or layers. While unstructured pruning significantly reduces model size, con-
ventional hardware like GPUs struggle to leverage the unstructured sparse patterns to 
accelerate model inference  [23]. Consequently, several structured pruning techniques 
have gained popularity in the landscape of LLM compression, such as attention head 
pruning  [24], which involves removing individual attention heads without significant 
impacts on performance and without requiring model retraining.
Explainable artificial intelligence
Deep learning models pose a challenge in offering interpretable explanations for their 
predictions, hindering their practical utility in crucial domains such as healthcare and 
legal contexts [25]. To address this issue, eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) tech-
niques have emerged, which can be distinguished between local explainers, which only 
explain the reasoning behind an individual prediction, and global explainers, which 
instead provide a rationale for the whole dataset [26]. XAI approaches can be further 
categorized into post-hoc and interpretable-by-design methods. Post-hoc methods aim 
at interpreting black-box models after training. Most post-hoc techniques are currently 
model-agonistic since they make any assumption about the structure of the deep learn-
ing model to be explained but treat it as a black-box model. In contrast, self-explainable 
models are inherently designed for interpretability during the prediction phase, pro-
viding ante-hoc explanations that faithfully represent the model’s reasoning. However, 
these methods are not flexible and may not easily be integrated with other deep learning 
models [27, 28]. Among post-hoc methods, LIME (Locally Interpretable Model-Agnostic 
Explainer) [29] is a local and model-agnostic explanation technique that extracts fea-
ture importance scores by perturbing real samples and observing the corresponding 
changes in the model’s predictions. Then a simple and interpretable model is built that 
approximates the original model’s behavior in the neighborhood of the original samples. 
