Page 3 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
	
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. "Related work" section discusses state 
of the art about knowledge distillation, deployment of LLM on resource-constrained 
devices, and XAI techniques. "Proposed method" section  describes the proposed DiX-
till method. "Experimental evaluation" section  presents the experimental evaluation and 
the obtained results. Finally, "Conclusion" section concludes the paper.
Related work
Knowledge distillation
The literature on knowledge distillation encompasses a wide range of techniques, which 
can be broadly categorized into three classes [8, 11, 12]: (i) offline, where a pre-trained 
teacher model guides the student model training; (ii) online, where both models are 
updated simultaneously in a single end-to-end training process; and (iii) self-distillation, 
where either the same model serves as both the teacher and student [13], transferring 
knowledge from deeper to shallower layers, or the student is a separate model sharing 
the same architecture as the teacher.
The knowledge is transferred from the teacher model to the student by minimizing a 
loss function that encourages the student network to mimic the teacher network’s label 
predictions. The commonly used loss function for knowledge distillation is a linear com-
bination of the cross-entropy and the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence loss between 
the softened probability distributions of the teacher and student models. Specifically, 
a temperature scaling factor τ is generally used to smooth the probability distributions 
and reveal inter-class relationships learned by the teacher [8]. Hence, the loss function is 
mathematically expressed as follows:
where S is the student, T is the teacher, α is a hyperparameter for the convex combi-
nation, and pF (τ) is the probability distribution scaled with temperature τ , obtained 
as pF (τ) = softmax(z/τ) , where z = F(x) are the output logits computed by a 
given model F . Recent research has also explored the impact of the KL loss func-
tion on logit matching and of such softening on generalization. Notably, as an alter-
native to the KL divergence, the Mean Squared Error (MSE) has been used in the 
literature [14, 15] to promote the matching between teacher and student logits z, for-
mally: LMSE(zT, zS) = ||zT −zS||2
2.
Deployment of LLMs on low‑resource devices
To enable the deployment of LLMs on devices with limited computational resources, 
several techniques such as distillation, quantization, and pruning have been leveraged in 
the literature [16]. Knowledge distillation has been explored to reduce the size of LLMs 
and allow them to operate under constrained computational scenarios. One notable 
example is DistilBERT [17], which is a lightweight Transformer model obtained by dis-
tilling BERT base with 40% fewer parameters than the original BERT. Other attempts 
have been made to distill knowledge from large models to lightweight neural archi-
tectures, using a cross-architecture knowledge distillation process  [18]. For example, 
(1)
L = −(1 −α)
 
j
log pS
j (1)

+ α
 
i
pT
i (τ) log pT
i (τ)
pS
i (τ) · τ 2

