Page 2 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
175 billion parameters, requiring at least 320 gigabytes of storage in half-precision (i.e., 
16-bit floating point) [4].
The diffusion of low-resource devices, such as mobile and Internet-of-Things (IoT) 
ones, driven by novel edge AI paradigms, led to the increasing need for finding effi-
cient ways to deploy and run complex deep learning models on such small and com-
pact devices [5, 6]. In this context, different techniques for model compression such as 
pruning and quantization have emerged, as well as some approaches relying on Knowl-
edge Distillation (KD) [7, 8]. In particular, knowledge distillation has been leveraged to 
transfer knowledge from a complex model, referred to as the teacher, to a more com-
pact, computationally efficient one, known as the student. Despite the ability of such 
approaches to achieve comparable performance to the original model while significantly 
reducing computational demands, they may struggle to transfer the rationale behind 
the teacher’s decision process to the student. Indeed, as the field of artificial intelligence 
continues to progress, there has been a growing emphasis on transparency and inter-
pretability in deep learning systems. The demand for eXplainable Artificial Intelligence 
(XAI) has arisen as a response to the need for comprehensibility in the decision-making 
processes of complex predictive models.
Only a few efforts have been made in the literature to leverage recent advancements 
in XAI to drive the learning process of deep learning models [9, 10]. In this paper, we 
propose DiXtill, a novel approach to distilling knowledge from transformer-based 
LLMs into lightweight neural architectures, specifically a bi-directional Long Short-
Term Memory network. The main idea behind DiXtill is to leverage local explanations 
to guide the distillation process of a teacher model into a self-explainable student. This 
XAI-driven distillation process aims at transferring the knowledge and the explanations 
from the teacher to the student model, thus enhancing both the performance and inter-
pretability of the distilled student model.
Our method allows the student to achieve comparable performance to the teacher 
LLM, while also delivering significantly higher compression ratio and speedup compared 
to post-training quantization and pruning, thus easing the deployment and inference on 
low-resource devices. In addition, experimental results show how the teacher’s explana-
tions can be effectively transferred to the student model during the distillation process. 
In particular, we measured a strong agreement between the teacher’s word attributions, 
computed by the Integrated Gradients method, and those of the self-explainable student 
learned during the distillation process.
The contribution of our work can be summarized as follows:
•	 We identify a limitation of traditional knowledge distillation methods in conveying 
explainable knowledge from a teacher LLM to the student.
•	 We propose to integrate local explanations within the distillation process of a teacher 
LLM into a self-explainable lightweight student, which enhances both the accuracy 
and interpretability of the distilled model.
•	 By employing a cross-architecture knowledge distillation process, a significantly 
smaller and more computationally efficient model can be attained compared to other 
compression techniques such as quantization and pruning, which instead retain the 
same complex architecture as the teacher model.
