Page 12 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
of 1.20× . Furthermore, this method exhibits the most substantial decline in overall 
classification performance compared to the other compression techniques.
In contrast, DiXtill allows for distilling knowledge from a large BERT-like model to a 
very lightweight Bi-LSTM network, with a size of only 3.45 MB, achieving a remarkable 
compression ratio of 127× . Our method also reduces inference time by an order of mag-
nitude with a speedup of 8.7× , proving effective in alleviating computational burdens 
during inference compared to the teacher model and other compression methods.
It is worth pointing out that to achieve higher compression ratios for the pruned 
model, more attention heads can be removed. However, this approach results in a 
marked degradation of classification performance, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. This figure 
depicts the evolution of the macro F1 score as the number of pruned heads increases 
from 0 (i.e., no pruning is performed) to 11 (i.e., only the most important head within 
each layer is retained from the original model), in comparison to the performance of the 
teacher and other compressed models. Notably, performance drop becomes unaccep-
table when pruning more than 6 attention heads, with a significant decrease observed, 
reaching a macro F1 score of 0.4 when employing only 1 head. In line with the results 
of [24], in some cases removing an attention head may result in increased performance 
(e.g., pruning 1, 2, or 3 heads within each layer in our experiments). Furthermore, a 
cross-domain analysis of classification performance and speedup, shown in Fig.  3b, 
reveals that DiXtill consistently outperforms other methods in terms of reduced model 
size, classification performance, and speedup.
Evaluating agreement between teacher and student explanations
In this section, we evaluate the consistency of the self-computed explanations of DiXtill 
and those related to the other distillation methods outlined in "Comparison with knowl-
edge distillation methods" section, computed through IG. Specifically, given F as the set 
of features (i.e., words) of the sample x to be explained, we measured the pairwise agree-
ment between the explanations obtained for the teacher T (i.e., ET(x) ) and the different 
distilled students S (i.e., ES(x) ). We used the following metrics [40]:
Fig. 3  Comparison of DiXtill, PTQ, and AHP models at varying numbers of heads pruned, in terms of macro 
F1, compression ratio, and speedup
