Page 7 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
	
attending to those masked elements. Overall, the masking process is performed as 
follows: σi = σi · µi
−→
µi = (µi −1) · 104
−→
˜σi = σi + µi.
At this point, the attention weights α ∈ℜk are computed by applying a softmax func-
tion to the unnormalized adjusted scores ˜σ , converting them into a distribution. Finally, 
a weighted average of the bi-LSTM hidden states H is determined, resulting in the vector 
ˆh ∈ℜd , which is fed to a linear layer to compute the output logits z:
Here, Wout ∈ℜm×d and bout ∈ℜm are trainable weights, where m is the number of 
classes. The model predicts the class c for the input sequence x as c = argmax
m
(z) , along 
with an explanation E(x) . The explanation is built starting from the vector of masked 
attention scores σ as a set of pairs (wi : σi) , denoting the influence of each word wi on the 
model classification of x into class c.
Incorporating explanations into the distillation process
As mentioned before, the key idea behind the XAI-driven approach introduced by DiX-
till involves utilizing local explanations to guide the distillation of a teacher LLM into 
a compact self-explainable bi-LSTM enhanced with masked attention, to improve both 
the effectiveness and interoperability of the distilled student.
In DiXtill, a post-hoc explanation technique is leveraged to compute an explana-
tion ET(x) of the teacher predictions for each training instance x. Such an explanation 
is required to be a list of (wi : σ T
i ) , in which σ T
i are the word attributions specifying 
to what extent each word wi ∈x influences the teacher prediction for each particular 
instance. Therefore, the proposed method integrates well with the most popular post-
hoc XAI approaches in the literature, such as SHAP, LIME, and Integrated Gradients 
(IG). Specifically, in DiXtill we used Integrated Gradients for computing teacher expla-
nations for the training data. We chose IG due to its ease of implementation, theoretical 
justifications, and computational efficiency when compared to alternative approaches 
such as LIME or SHAP, which allow it for scaling to large networks such as those of 
LLMs, and feature spaces. In addition, IG is specifically designed to work well with a 
variety of deep networks, while methods such as LIME and SHAP may provide explana-
tions that are inconsistent and unstable [38]. The IG method highlights feature impor-
tance by computing the gradient of the model output prediction with respect to its input 
features. Specifically, let x ∈ℜd and x′ ∈ℜd be the input instance and a baseline, respec-
tively; in the case of text data, the baseline may be a zero d-dimensional vector. The inte-
grated gradient for an input x and a baseline x′ is obtained by cumulating the gradients 
computed on all points lying on the straight path connecting the input and the baseline. 
Formally, the IG along the ith dimension for a particular instance x is defined as follows:
Here, F : ℜd →[0, 1] is a function representing the model to be explained, and ∂F(x)
∂xi is 
the gradient of F(x) along the ith feature.
(2)
z = Wout · ˆh + bout , where: αi =
e ˜σi
k
j=1 e ˜σj ,
ˆhi =
k

j=1
Hij · αj
(3)
(xi −x′
i) ×
 1
α=0
∂F(x′ + α × (x −x′))
∂xi
dα
