Page 8 of 17
Cantini et al. Journal of Big Data  (2024) 11:63
Once explanations for the teacher are computed, these can be leveraged to guide the 
distillation process. In particular, DiXtill introduces an extension of the classical dis-
tillation loss, by adding an XAI-based term, i.e., LXAI , which promotes the alignment 
between the explanation provided by the teacher and the student for each training 
instance x by using a cosine distance loss. Let ET(x) and ES(x) be the explanation of the 
teacher and the student prediction for an input instance x, respectively. Word attribu-
tions can be extracted from the explanations, which are the σ T vector for the teacher, 
statically computed by IG, and the σ S vector for the student, dynamically computed 
by the student itself, and learned via backpropagation. The LXAI loss term is defined as 
follows:
Therefore, the overall loss is defined as: L = (1 −α)LCE + α(LKD + LXAI) , where:
•	 LCE is the standard cross-entropy loss of the student with respect to the real hard 
training labels y weighted by a factor (1 −α).
•	 LKD is the distillation loss term, represented by a normalized version of the Kull-
back–Leibler divergence scaled by a factor α . It is computed between the softmax 
predictions of the teacher and the student models, softened with temperature τ , and 
it is defined as: 1 −exp

−KL(pT(τ), pS(τ)

.
•	 LXAI is the aforementioned XAI-based loss term, scaled by a factor α , forcing the 
student to align the learned explanations (i.e, the unnormalized attention weights σ S ) 
to those of the teacher computed via the IG method.
Experimental evaluation
In this section, we present the experimental evaluation we carried out to assess the effec-
tiveness of DiXtill. The experiments were conducted using FinBERT [39], a BERT model 
pre-trained on financial communication text. Specifically, the FinBERT model was fine-
tuned on the Twitter Financial News dataset, which is an English-language dataset con-
taining an annotated corpus of finance-related tweets for sentiment analysis. The dataset 
contains 9 938 training instances and 2 486 instances for testing purposes. The model 
determines the financial sentiment of given tweets, which can be classified as bearish, 
bullish, or neutral.
As concerns the student model configuration, we used a Glove word embedding layer, 
which produces 50-dimensional vector representations, and 50 hidden LSTM units 
with a sequence length equal to 150. In addition, each model was trained for 15 epochs 
using the SGD optimization algorithm with a momentum of 0.9 and a learning rate of 
0.01. Moreover, as suggested by Hinton et al. [8], we used a value of 0.9 for the α hyper-
parameter, which assigns a considerably higher weight to the distillation loss LKD and 
the attributions alignment term LXAI introduced by DiXtill, compared to the standard 
cross-entropy loss term LCE . Finally, the temperature value τ was set to 5 for all distilla-
tion techniques employing temperature scaling.
In the following sections, we demonstrate how our XAI-driven distillation method 
outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in terms of performance. Then, we discuss 
(4)
LXAI = 1
2

1 −
σ T · σ S
||σ T|| ||σ S||

