2
R
(a)
(b)
∝B1
∝B-1
Figure 1. Field-dependent relaxation in 1-13C PA doped with
15 mM trityl (OX063).
(a) 13C relaxation times for diﬀer-
ent temperatures together with 1.8 K data (gray) reproduced
from Ref.11. The dashed gray line corresponds to a power law
with an exponent α = 3.1 as reported by Niedbalski et al.
based on measurements at 1.8 K and ﬁelds from 0.9 to 9 T.
The dotted gray line is computed using T1 = cB/(1 −P 2
0 ),
where c = 50 s/T, and P0 = tanh(ℏγSB/(2kBT)) is the elec-
tron spin polarization. (b) The 4.2 K data on doped PA (solid
symbols) plotted as rates together with 1H data. For compar-
ison the relaxation rates measured on neat PA (open symbols)
are shown as well. The presence of OX063 increases the relax-
ation rate of carbons throughout the observed ﬁeld range, and
causes faster proton relaxation up to approximately 200 mT.
Also shown are EPR relaxation data reported by Lumata et
al.14 near 4.2 K.
The presence of trityl signiﬁcantly accelerates the re-
laxation of carbon over the entire ﬁeld range, while the
eﬀect on proton relaxation is only observable for ﬁelds
below 200 mT.
In addition to the nuclear relaxation rates, Fig. 1(b)
also shows electron spin-lattice relaxation rates reported
by Lumata et al.14 for temperatures near 4.2 K. For our
analysis below, we note that R1,S(T = 4K) ≈5 s−1 is
nearly independent of ﬁeld, which is expected since trityl
relaxes predominantly via oxygen.16
We have recently shown that the proton relaxation
can be described quantitatively17 using a thermodynamic
spin temperature model.18–20 In this model, as indicated
in the sketch in Fig. 2, the diﬀerent nuclear spin species
and radical electron spins are described as reservoirs with
distinct inverse temperatures βi = ℏ/(kBTi) that cou-
ple to one another and the lattice.
In particular, we
showed that the relaxation of proton spins is described
by their coupling to the electron Non-Zeeman (NZ) or
dipolar reservoir. This exchange is via energy-conserving
triple-spin ﬂips (TSFs), in which a nuclear spin ﬂip and
an electron-electron ﬂip-ﬂop occur simultaneously.21 The
TSF rate was calculated from ﬁrst principles,22,23 after
determining the NZ heat capacity from proton relaxation
data. This lead to a nearly quantitative agreement be-
tween the model and the measured proton relaxation
rates over two orders of magnitude in magnetic ﬁeld.17
Note that in this previous analysis of the proton re-
laxation, the carbon reservoir could be ignored, as its
heat capacity CC is about 64 times smaller than that of
the proton reservoir CH for pyruvic acid at any ﬁeld, as
shown in Fig. 2 (a). We now extend the analysis to the
carbon reservoir, which is coupled to the lattice with the
rate T ◦
1,C
−1 measured in neat PA and to the NZ reservoir
with the TSF rate τ −1
NZ−C. The latter is calculated17 and
compared to the TSF rate for protons in Fig. 2 (b). The
ﬁeld-dependence of the carbon TSF rate is shifted rela-
tive to that of protons by a factor of γH/γC = 4 and its
amplitude is two orders of magnitude smaller.
Details on the extension of the previous analysis17 to
three reservoirs and its numerical solution can be found in
the Supplement. The relaxation of three coupled reser-
voirs to the lattice temperature is generally given by a
tri-exponential decay. Since the experimental data do not
warrant an extraction of three coeﬃcients and three de-
cay rates, we compare the experimental data in Fig. 2 (c)
with eﬀective relaxation rates Ri,comb(t) = −˙βi(t)/βi(t),
evaluated at the time of measurement t = T •
1,i(B0). De-
tails are givene in the Supplement.
As expected, the presence of the carbon reservoir does
not aﬀect the resulting proton relaxation (solid green line
in Fig. 2 (c)), i.e., the three-reservoir description traces
the proton data for doped PA (full squares) as well as the
previous analysis,17 which had considered only protons
and the NZ reservoir.
The solution for the expected carbon rate (solid or-
ange line in Fig. 2 (c)), however, does not describe the
measured carbon rates well. At ﬁelds up to 20 mT, the
predicted relaxation rates are smaller than the ones ob-
served in experiment. For ﬁelds above 50 mT, the pre-
dicted relaxation rates are larger than the ones observed
in experiment.
The discrepancy at low ﬁelds may be attributed to di-
rect thermal mixing between the 1H and 13C reservoirs.
The rate for this process, denoted by τ −1
H−C in Fig. 2(b), is
negligible above 20 mT but becomes signiﬁcant at lower
ﬁelds.13 Note that this direct mixing process causes the
convergence, noted above, of the experimental carbon
and proton relaxation rates at low ﬁelds in neat PA.
Therefore, in neat PA below 20 mT, τ −1
H−C should corre-
spond to the experimentally observed carbon relaxation
rate. We ﬁnd that the low-ﬁeld relaxation rates of 13C in
doped PA are well described by 5 · T ◦
1,C
−1, i.e. the direct
proton-carbon relaxation rates scale with the neat rates,
but are accelerated ﬁve-fold. We attribute this increase
to line-broadening due to the presence of trityl in doped
