3
H
predicted
τC-C
-1
bulk
core
3
4
τNZ-H
-1
TH
-1
○
TS
-1
τNZ-C
-1
TC
-1
○
τH-C
-1
predicted
Figure 2.
top: Carbon relaxation is described by three
reservoirs coupled to the lattice and each other.
(heat ca-
pacity for 1-13C PA at 200 mT as vertical axis) (a) Heat ca-
pacities of nuclear Zeeman reservoirs grow quadratically with
ﬁeld, while the NZ heat capacity is ﬁeld-independent. (b) Ex-
change rates used for modelling of nuclear relaxation rates.
The TSF rates τ −1
NZ−H/C have previously been calculated17
and the electron T −1
1,S is deduced from literature data14. Also
shown are the deduced carbon core-bulk diﬀusion rate τ −1
C−C
and the proton-carbon mixing rate τ −1
H−C. (c) The resulting
coeﬃcient-weighted relaxation rates for protons RH,comb(t =
T •
1,H) describe 1H data well17. The predicted rate for carbon
RC,comb(t = T •
1,C) is slower than experimental rates T •
1,C
−1
for ﬁelds up to 30 mT and faster above. Between 0.1 and 1 T
the high TSF rates for both nuclei cause the predicted rate
for carbon to be tied to the proton relaxation. Taking into ac-
count faster low-ﬁeld mixing with protons and carbon-carbon
spin-diﬀusion, the 13C data are well described (dash-dot line).
PA.
The discrepancy observed at ﬁelds above 50 mT may
be attributed to carbon spin diﬀusion.
In the model,
the protons are in the fast thermal mixing limit in this
ﬁeld range, i.e., the NZ reservoir exchanges faster with
the protons than with the lattice (τ −1
NZ−H ≫T −1
1,S) and
the NZ heat capacity does not aﬀect the proton reservoir
relevantly (CNZ ≪CH). Therefore the proton reservoir
sets the temperature of the Non-Zeeman reservoir. As
the ﬁeld is increased, the carbon reservoir increasingly
couples to the NZ reservoir, and so the model predicts
the same spin temperatures and hence relaxation rates
for both protons and carbons.
However, only a minute portion of nuclear spins in the
radical vicinity, referred to as core spins, are in direct ex-
change with the electron NZ reservoir. Carbon spins in
the bulk only exchange the radicals indirectly via carbon
spin diﬀusion. From our experiments we cannot distin-
guish whether a slow exchange between core and bulk
carbon spins impedes the relaxation, or if the diﬀusion
through the bulk is ﬁeld-dependent, and we discuss both
possibilities below
As detailed in the Supplement and indicated in the
sketch in Fig. 2, the relaxation model may be extended
with a second carbon reservoir and a ﬁeld-dependent car-
bon core-bulk time constant of 33 s/T. This leads to a
satisfactory description (dash-dot line in Fig. 2 (c)) of
the experimental data.
So altogether, the model, that describes low-ﬁeld pro-
ton relaxation in trityl-doped PA by exchange with the
radical NZ reservoir17, can be expanded to account for
the 13C relaxation. The model predicts eﬃcient proton-
carbon coupling mediated by the NZ reservoir above
20 mT, and our analysis indicates additionally (i) a ﬁve-
fold accelerated direct hetero-nuclear exchange at low
ﬁeld, and (ii) that the indirect hetero-nuclear coupling
is slowed by a ﬁeld-dependent carbon diﬀusion.
We now show that model’s prediction as well as the
modiﬁcations (i,ii) are consistent with the low-ﬁeld ther-
mal mixing (TM) experiments, which are displayed in
Fig. 3. In these experiments the carbon spins are satu-
rated while the proton polarization is allowed to achieve
thermal equilibrium at 2 T. The ﬁeld is then ramped to
the mixing ﬁeld for the duration of the mixing delay. Sub-
sequently the ﬁeld is ramped back to 2 T, where the 13C
spin polarization is read out. Further details are given in
the Supplement.
In order to quantify the eﬀectiveness of the thermal
mixing step we deﬁne the thermal mixing eﬃciency η as
the observed signal divided by the thermal equilibrium
signal of 13C at 2 T. We can neglect the heat load of the
carbon reservoir on the protons, so a thermal mixing eﬃ-
ciency of 100% then implies that the carbon spins attain
the spin temperature of the proton spins without any
losses, which corresponds to the theoretical maximum
attainable in absence of any relaxation.
The dependences of TM eﬃciency on mixing delay at
diﬀerent ﬁelds measured in neat and doped PA at 4.2 K
