Radical-induced Hetero-Nuclear Mixing and Low-ﬁeld 13C Relaxation in Solid Pyruvic Acid
Hana Kouˇrilov´a,1, ∗Michael Jurkutat,1, † David Peat,2 Karel Kouˇril,1 Alixander S. Khan,2
Anthony J. Horsewill,2 James F. MacDonald,2 John Owers-Bradley,2 and Benno Meier1, 3, ‡
1Institute of Biological Interfaces 4, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK
3Institute of Physical Chemistry, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
(Dated: August 2, 2022)
Radicals serve as source in dynamic nuclear polarization, but may also act as polarization sink.
If the coupling between the electron spins and diﬀerent nuclear reservoirs is stronger than any of
the reservoirs’ couplings to the lattice, radicals can mediate hetero-nuclear mixing. Here, we report
radical-enhanced 13C relaxation in pyruvic acid doped with trityl. We ﬁnd a linear dependence of
the carbon T1 on ﬁeld between 5 mT and 2 T. We extend a model, employed previously for protons,
to carbon, and predict eﬃcient proton-carbon mixing via the radical Non-Zeeman reservoir, for ﬁelds
from 20 mT to beyond 1 T. Discrepancies between the observed carbon relaxation and the model
are attributed to enhanced direct hetero-nuclear mixing due to trityl-induced linebroadening, and
a ﬁeld-dependent carbon diﬀusion from the radical vicinity to the bulk. Measurements of hetero-
nuclear polarization transfer up to 600 mT conﬁrm the predicted mixing as well as both eﬀects
inferred from the relaxation analysis.
ARTICLE
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic res-
onance imaging (MRI) are powerful tools in various ﬁelds
of science and industry, but their versatility is limited by
the weak nuclear polarization. The low sensitivity may be
alleviated by dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP), where
the large polarization of electron spins is transferred to
nuclear spins. In dissolution-DNP,1 this process is car-
ried out at temperatures near 1 K and ﬁelds of several
Tesla. Under these conditions, the electron spins are al-
most fully polarized, and it is possible to achieve near
unity polarization also for nuclear spins. The hyperpolar-
ized sample is then dissolved with a jet of hot solvent, and
the solution is used for sensitized NMR spectroscopy2–4
or imaging5–8.
In bullet-DNP, the order of dissolution and transfer is
reversed.9,10 Here, the solid sample is transferred rapidly
to the second magnet, and dissolved only near the NMR
tube. This procedure limits dilution, avoids the use of
hot solvents, and may be beneﬁcial for hyperpolarization
of moieties with a short T1 in the liquid state.
During the bullet transfer at low ﬁeld (currently about
70 mT) the radical spin that is needed as source for DNP,
however, may act as polarization sink. The extent of this
eﬀect was previously diﬃcult to estimate, since the low-
ﬁeld low-temperature relaxation in presence of radicals
has not been studied comprehensively. A previous study
at low temperature in pyruvic acid doped with trityl be-
tween 0.9 and 9 T found a cubic ﬁeld-dependence of the
carbon T1.11 If this trend were to continue to lower ﬁelds,
it would be detrimental for bullet-DNP.
We have recently reported the low-temperature low-
ﬁeld 1H relaxation in pyruvic acid doped with trityl,
where we showed that a ﬁrst-principle based formalism
by Wenckebach can describe the eﬀect of trityl quanti-
tatively over two orders of magnitude in ﬁeld. Here, we
present the corresponding 13C relaxation measurements
as well as thermal mixing data in non-degassed neat 1-
13C pyruvic acid (neat PA, ◦) and 1-13C pyruvic acid
doped with 15 mM OX063 (doped PA, •) for ﬁelds up
to 2 T. The measurements were performed using a fast
ﬁeld cycling (FFC) setup previously described12,13, ex-
perimental details are given in the Supplement.
Fig. 1(a) shows the ﬁeld-dependence of the carbon re-
laxation time T •
1,C for doped PA for temperatures be-
tween 4.2 K and 40 K. At low ﬁelds, we ﬁnd an approx-
imately linear increase of T •
1,C with ﬁeld. This low-ﬁeld
linearity holds up to 40 K, although T •
1,C expectedly de-
creases with increasing temperature.
Also shown in Fig. 1(a) are data at 1.8 K recorded by
Niedbalski, Lumata and co-workers11. They found that
their data are well described by a power law T1 = CBα,
with an exponent of α = 3.1, indicated by the dashed
gray line. While we observe a linear rather than a cu-
bic ﬁeld dependence at lower ﬁelds, our data at 4.2 K are
nonetheless in good agreement with the data by Niedbal-
ski et al. at 1.8 K.
The steep increase in 13C T •
1,C, as observed by Niedbal-
ski et al. at 1.8 K, may be attributed to the substantial
electron spin polarization P0 with increasing ﬁeld, which
leads to a suppression of triple-spin ﬂips. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), a corresponding correction of the observed lin-
ear dependence (dotted gray line) gives a satisfactory de-
scription over more than four orders of magnitude in T1.
To assess the eﬀect of trityl radicals on nuclear relax-
ation, it is requisite to compare the relaxation of both
1H and 13C nuclear spins in the presence of trityl to that
in neat PA. Relaxation rates R1 = 1/T1 of both nuclei,
recorded at 4.2 K, are shown for neat and doped PA in
Figure 1(b).
We note for neat PA that the rates R◦
1 of protons and
carbons converge at low ﬁeld, which is expected based on
reports of direct low-ﬁeld thermal mixing in neat PA13,15.
This direct exchange is negligible for B > 10 mT but
becomes relevant as the ﬁeld approaches zero.
arXiv:2202.05688v2  [physics.chem-ph]  1 Aug 2022
