0
100
200
300
400
500
20
25
30
35
40
45
Epoch
Error (%) / NLL (scaled)
NLL Overfitting on CIFAR−100
 
 
Test error
Test NLL
Figure 3. Test error and NLL of a 110-layer ResNet with stochas-
tic depth on CIFAR-100 during training. NLL is scaled by a con-
stant to ﬁt in the ﬁgure. Learning rate drops by 10x at epochs 250
and 375. The shaded area marks between epochs at which the best
validation loss and best validation error are produced.
den layers. Recent research suggests that these normal-
ization techniques have enabled the development of very
deep architectures, such as ResNets (He et al., 2016) and
DenseNets (Huang et al., 2017). It has been shown that
Batch Normalization improves training time, reduces the
need for additional regularization, and can in some cases
improve the accuracy of networks.
While it is difﬁcult to pinpoint exactly how Batch Normal-
ization affects the ﬁnal predictions of a model, we do ob-
serve that models trained with Batch Normalization tend to
be more miscalibrated. In the middle right plot of Figure 2,
we see that a 6-layer ConvNet obtains worse calibration
when Batch Normalization is applied, even though classi-
ﬁcation accuracy improves slightly. We ﬁnd that this result
holds regardless of the hyperparameters used on the Batch
Normalization model (i.e. low or high learning rate, etc.).
Weight decay,
which used to be the predominant regu-
larization mechanism for neural networks, is decreasingly
utilized when training modern neural networks. Learning
theory suggests that regularization is necessary to prevent
overﬁtting, especially as model capacity increases (Vapnik,
1998). However, due to the apparent regularization effects
of Batch Normalization, recent research seems to suggest
that models with less L2 regularization tend to generalize
better (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). As a result, it is now com-
mon to train models with little weight decay, if any at all.
The top performing ImageNet models of 2015 all use an or-
der of magnitude less weight decay than models of previous
years (He et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015).
We ﬁnd that training with less weight decay has a negative
impact on calibration. The far right plot in Figure 2 dis-
plays training error and ECE for a 110-layer ResNet with
varying amounts of weight decay. The only other forms
of regularization are data augmentation and Batch Normal-
ization. We observe that calibration and accuracy are not
optimized by the same parameter setting. While the model
exhibits both over-regularization and under-regularization
with respect to classiﬁcation error, it does not appear that
calibration is negatively impacted by having too much
weight decay.
Model calibration continues to improve
when more regularization is added, well after the point of
achieving optimal accuracy. The slight uptick at the end of
the graph may be an artifact of using a weight decay factor
that impedes optimization.
NLL
can be used to indirectly measure model calibra-
tion. In practice, we observe a disconnect between NLL
and accuracy, which may explain the miscalibration in Fig-
ure 2. This disconnect occurs because neural networks can
overﬁt to NLL without overﬁtting to the 0/1 loss. We ob-
serve this trend in the training curves of some miscalibrated
models. Figure 3 shows test error and NLL (rescaled to
match error) on CIFAR-100 as training progresses. Both
error and NLL immediately drop at epoch 250, when the
learning rate is dropped; however, NLL overﬁts during the
remainder of training. Surprisingly, overﬁtting to NLL is
beneﬁcial to classiﬁcation accuracy. On CIFAR-100, test
error drops from 29% to 27% in the region where NLL
overﬁts. This phenomenon renders a concrete explanation
of miscalibration: the network learns better classiﬁcation
accuracy at the expense of well-modeled probabilities.
We can connect this ﬁnding to recent work examining the
generalization of large neural networks. Zhang et al. (2017)
observe that deep neural networks seemingly violate the
common understanding of learning theory that large mod-
els with little regularization will not generalize well. The
observed disconnect between NLL and 0/1 loss suggests
that these high capacity models are not necessarily immune
from overﬁtting, but rather, overﬁtting manifests in proba-
bilistic error rather than classiﬁcation error.
4. Calibration Methods
In this section, we ﬁrst review existing calibration meth-
ods, and introduce new variants of our own. All methods
are post-processing steps that produce (calibrated) proba-
bilities. Each method requires a hold-out validation set,
which in practice can be the same set used for hyperparam-
eter tuning. We assume that the training, validation, and
test sets are drawn from the same distribution.
4.1. Calibrating Binary Models
We ﬁrst introduce calibration in the binary setting, i.e.
Y = {0, 1}. For simplicity, throughout this subsection,
