guage model in speech recognition (Hannun et al., 2014;
Xiong et al., 2016), or with camera information for object
detection (Kendall & Cipolla, 2016).
In 2005, Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana (2005) showed that
neural networks typically produce well-calibrated proba-
bilities on binary classiﬁcation tasks. While neural net-
works today are undoubtedly more accurate than they were
a decade ago, we discover with great surprise that mod-
ern neural networks are no longer well-calibrated. This
is visualized in Figure 1, which compares a 5-layer LeNet
(left) (LeCun et al., 1998) with a 110-layer ResNet (right)
(He et al., 2016) on the CIFAR-100 dataset. The top row
shows the distribution of prediction conﬁdence (i.e. prob-
abilities associated with the predicted label) as histograms.
The average conﬁdence of LeNet closely matches its accu-
racy, while the average conﬁdence of the ResNet is substan-
tially higher than its accuracy. This is further illustrated in
the bottom row reliability diagrams (DeGroot & Fienberg,
1983; Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005), which show ac-
curacy as a function of conﬁdence. We see that LeNet is
well-calibrated, as conﬁdence closely approximates the ex-
pected accuracy (i.e. the bars align roughly along the diag-
onal). On the other hand, the ResNet’s accuracy is better,
but does not match its conﬁdence.
Our goal is not only to understand why neural networks
have become miscalibrated, but also to identify what meth-
ods can alleviate this problem. In this paper, we demon-
strate on several computer vision and NLP tasks that neu-
ral networks produce conﬁdences that do not represent true
probabilities. Additionally, we offer insight and intuition
into network training and architectural trends that may
cause miscalibration. Finally, we compare various post-
processing calibration methods on state-of-the-art neural
networks, and introduce several extensions of our own.
Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that a single-parameter variant of Platt
scaling (Platt et al., 1999) – which we refer to as temper-
ature scaling – is often the most effective method at ob-
taining calibrated probabilities.
Because this method is
straightforward to implement with existing deep learning
frameworks, it can be easily adopted in practical settings.
2. Deﬁnitions
The problem we address in this paper is supervised multi-
class classiﬁcation with neural networks. The input X ∈X
and label Y
∈Y = {1, . . . , K} are random variables
that follow a ground truth joint distribution π(X, Y ) =
π(Y |X)π(X). Let h be a neural network with h(X) =
( ˆY , ˆP), where ˆY is a class prediction and ˆP is its associ-
ated conﬁdence, i.e. probability of correctness. We would
like the conﬁdence estimate ˆP to be calibrated, which in-
tuitively means that ˆP represents a true probability. For
example, given 100 predictions, each with conﬁdence of
0.8, we expect that 80 should be correctly classiﬁed. More
formally, we deﬁne perfect calibration as
P

ˆY = Y | ˆP = p

= p,
∀p ∈[0, 1]
(1)
where the probability is over the joint distribution. In all
practical settings, achieving perfect calibration is impos-
sible. Additionally, the probability in (1) cannot be com-
puted using ﬁnitely many samples since ˆP is a continuous
random variable. This motivates the need for empirical ap-
proximations that capture the essence of (1).
Reliability Diagrams
(e.g. Figure 1 bottom) are a visual
representation of model calibration (DeGroot & Fienberg,
1983; Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005). These diagrams
plot expected sample accuracy as a function of conﬁdence.
If the model is perfectly calibrated – i.e. if (1) holds – then
the diagram should plot the identity function. Any devia-
tion from a perfect diagonal represents miscalibration.
To estimate the expected accuracy from ﬁnite samples, we
group predictions into M interval bins (each of size 1/M)
and calculate the accuracy of each bin. Let Bm be the set
of indices of samples whose prediction conﬁdence falls into
the interval Im = ( m−1
M , m
M ]. The accuracy of Bm is
acc(Bm) =
1
|Bm|
X
i∈Bm
1(ˆyi = yi),
where ˆyi and yi are the predicted and true class labels for
sample i. Basic probability tells us that acc(Bm) is an un-
biased and consistent estimator of P( ˆY = Y | ˆP ∈Im).
We deﬁne the average conﬁdence within bin Bm as
conf(Bm) =
1
|Bm|
X
i∈Bm
ˆpi,
where ˆpi is the conﬁdence for sample i.
acc(Bm) and
conf(Bm) approximate the left-hand and right-hand sides
of (1) respectively for bin Bm. Therefore, a perfectly cal-
ibrated model will have acc(Bm) = conf(Bm) for all
m ∈{1, . . . , M}. Note that reliability diagrams do not dis-
play the proportion of samples in a given bin, and thus can-
not be used to estimate how many samples are calibrated.
Expected Calibration Error (ECE).
While reliability
diagrams are useful visual tools, it is more convenient to
have a scalar summary statistic of calibration. Since statis-
tics comparing two distributions cannot be comprehensive,
previous works have proposed variants, each with a unique
emphasis. One notion of miscalibration is the difference in
expectation between conﬁdence and accuracy, i.e.
E
ˆ
P
hP

ˆY = Y | ˆP = p

−p

i
(2)
Expected Calibration Error (Naeini et al., 2015) – or ECE
– approximates (2) by partitioning predictions into M
equally-spaced bins (similar to the reliability diagrams) and
