Sensors 2019, 19, 4383
4 of 20
based on a number of diﬀerent metrics, such as recall (R), precision (P), true positive rate (TP), and
false positive rate (FP). This study demonstrated that the SVM achieves a high detection rate of 96.7%
compared to the other classiﬁers.
Le et al. [48] proposed to use the random forest (RF) classiﬁer for detecting the type of DoS attacks
in WSNs. The proposed classiﬁer attains best F1-score results are 96%, 99%, 98%, 96% and 100% for
ﬂooding, blackhole, grayhole, scheduling (TDMA), and normal attacks, respectively. However, the
result of this study was for a small number of instances in the testing phase, which approximately
represents 25% (94,042 instances) of the data. Recently, Tan et al. [49] proposed a method for intrusion
detection using random forest classiﬁer and synthetic minority oversampling (SMOTE) technique.
They used the SMOTE technique for oversampling the minority samples. The experimental results of
the study showed that the accuracy of using random forest classiﬁer was 92.39% and the accuracy of
using SMOTE has increased the accuracy to 92.57%.
2. Research Methodology
2.1. Genetic Algorithm (GA)
Genetic algorithm (GA) is deﬁned as a heuristic adaptive search algorithm and inspired from
the evolutionary ideas of genetics. It represents an intelligent exploitation that uses a random search
for solving both unconstrained and constrained optimization problems [50]. The GA repetitively
alters individual solutions of a population and at each step, it selects randomly individuals from the
population that are currently in process to be parents; then, it utilizes them to generate the children for
the next generation of population. Undergoing development of these consecutive generations; the
solution is improved to optimality. Genetic algorithm is used to solve a variety of problems, including
mixed integer programming problems or the problems in which their objective function is stochastic,
non-diﬀerentiable, discontinuous, or highly nonlinear. Generally, the GA applies three diﬀerent rules on
the current population at each step to produce the next generation. These rules are:
•
Selection rules, which selects the individuals to be parents for contributing at next generation;
•
Crossover rules, which combines two parents to generate the children of next generation;
•
Mutation rules, which changes randomly the individual of children.
The GA diﬀers from a classical derivative-based optimization algorithm (DOA) in two key ways:
it creates a population of solutions at each iteration in which the best solution approaches to optimality
and uses a random computation for selecting the next population. While, the classical DOA creates a
single solution at each iteration in which a sequence of solutions approaches to the optimal situation
and uses a deterministic computation for selecting the next solution in the sequence. Algorithm 1
illustrates the pseudocode of GA as sequence of steps.
2.2. Gradient Boosting (GB) Model
Gradient boosting (GB) is an ensemble learning technique, used for classiﬁcation and regression
problems, proposed by Friedman [51,52]. It can produce an eﬀective model consisting of weak learners,
usually decision trees. The basic idea of GB is to build and generalize the ensemble model in a stage
wise fashion by optimizing an objective arbitrary loss function [53]. The GB technique constructs
its model from the previous loss function of negative gradient in an iteration manner. In the ML,
minimizing the loss function is an important issue and needs to be optimized. In other words, the
loss function represents the diﬀerence between the predicted output and the target. A low value
of loss function means a high prediction or classiﬁcation result. When the loss function decreases
sequentially and iteratively, the model goes consecutively along a speciﬁc direction, which is the
Gradient of loss function.
