Sensors 2019, 19, 4383
2 of 20
Mishra et al. [4] mentioned that the IDSs of wired networks are not an easy to apply for wireless
networks because of the diﬀerence in their architectures and lack of stable infrastructure. In addition,
the authors stated that the responses for detecting the type of intrusion in wireless networks depends on
the protocols of network, the conﬁdentiality, the applications, and the heterogeneity in wireless ad hoc
networks. These responses may be issued to detect the compromised nodes, reinitializing the network
to terminate these nodes, and then sending requests to all nodes in the network for re-authentication.
Furthermore, the authors introduce a discussion about seven IDSs proposed for MANETs based on a
set of methodologies such as mobile agent-based detection and distributed anomaly-based detection.
In the methodology of mobile agent-based detection, the IDS agent on the mobile node can collect
local data and perform local detection using mobile agent’s technology. While that the methodology of
distributed anomaly-based detection can use the information collected from the neighboring nodes for
performing global detection.
Anantvalee and Jie [5] introduced a study about IDS MANETs considering the infrastructure
of the network. Based on the nature of MANETs, the authors mentioned that most of the surveyed
IDSs could be distributed to have a cooperative structure. As well, this study presents a taxonomy of
nodes’ misbehavior in MANETs during detection task, regarding the punishment and route discovery,
observation and data distribution, and the architecture and type of data collection.
Kumar and Dutta [6] presented a review study of intrusion detection techniques in MANETs.
The authors in this study focused on the detection methods to classify the intrusion detection
techniques based on the mechanisms used in these detection methods. Additionally, the authors stated
the challenges that face the IDS in MANETs such as dynamic environments, time of detection, type
of attacks, routing protocol, mobility eﬀects, robustness, performance, ﬂexibility, speed, scalability,
and reliability.
A taxonomy of IDS for WSNs according to the way that the IDS agent can be used in the network
is presented in [7]. In this taxonomy, the IDS agent can be deployed as purely distributed where the IDS
is used in each sensor node, or as purely centralized where the IDS is installed in the base-station of the
network, and ﬁnally as distributed-centralized in which the IDS is deployed in some of monitor nodes.
The authors in this study explained the correlation between the position of IDS agent in the WSN and
energy consumptions, as well as they mentioned that the IDS of distributed-centralized taxonomy is
suitable for WSN with regard to complexity of network’s topology and power consumptions.
Another taxonomy of IDS for WSNs concerning to detection technique that may be anomaly-based
detection, misuse-based detection, and speciﬁcation-based detection is introduced in [8].
Some issues that are investigated in this study include lack of real IDS implementations in WSNs
as well as evolving the mechanisms of IDS to deal with the revolution of the IoT. Besides, they presented
some research areas of IDS for WSN that need further improvement, such as the tradeoﬀbetween
consumption of resources and accuracy, the IDS structural design, and the integration between the
IDS mechanisms.
An extensive literature review of IDS for WSNs is introduced in Reference [9] and another
literature review of IDS for IoT is presented in Reference [12]. In both literature reviews, the authors
conclude that some IDSs can be applicable directly, some other IDSs can be applicable with some major
modiﬁcations, and the rest cannot apply to WSNs due to the requirements of design in the WSNs.
Tsiropoulou et al. [13] described the interference mitigation risk aware (IMRA) problem in the
RFID network, which is part of IoT. They formulated the IMRA problem as a non-cooperative game
among all normal and intruders tags the RFID network. After that, they proposed a distributed iterative
and low-complexity algorithm to solve this problem and maximize the RFID tag’s utility function.
Based on the nature of attacks and the behavior of detection system, there are two kinds of IDS.
One of them is known as signature-based IDS. The signature-based IDS can recognize the patterns
of well-known intrusion attacks with excellent accuracy, but it is not able to identify new intrusion
attacks, which their signatures are not deﬁned in the database of attacks. The other kind is known
as anomaly-based IDS that can detect intrusions by identifying the features of intrusion attacks from
