Sensors 2019, 19, 4383
17 of 20
Table 12. Average execution time of classiﬁcation in seconds (s).
Model
Average Classiﬁcation Time
AdaBoost
10.093 s
GB
3.338 s
XGBoost
2.172 s
Proposed GXGBoost
1.905 s
We can see that the classiﬁcation time of GXGBoost and XGBoost is close to each other. However,
the average classiﬁcation time of GXGBoost is lower than XGBoost since it selects appropriate values
for its parameters in the training phase. The AdaBoost has a higher classiﬁcation time because it tries
to classify all the cases into majority classes without losing the overall accuracy. In general, as seen in
Table 10, the proposed model is eﬃcient for real-time WSNs intrusion detection.
3.5. Comparison with Related Work
To compare our work with the related recent work on the same dataset, the true positive rate (TPR)
is used as a uniform metric to do that. Figure 5 shows the values of TPR for the proposed GXGBoost
compared to the results of related work in Reference [46] using a 10 fold cross validation method.
Figure 5. TPR percentage values of the proposed GXGBoost compared to the results of related work in
Reference [46] using 10 fold cross validation method.
From Figure 5, we can see how the GXGBoost is eﬀective to classify with the minority classes
without signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the detection rates of the other classes.
4. Conclusions and Future work
A new model for WSN intrusion detection is proposed based on genetic algorithm (GA) and
extreme gradient boosting (XGBoot) classiﬁer, called GXGBoost model. The GXGBoost model was
designed to improve the performance of traditional models to detect minority classes of attacks in
highly imbalanced data traﬃcs of wireless sensor networks. A set of experiments were conducted on
WSN-DS dataset using holdout and 10-folds cross validation techniques. The results of 10-folds cross
validation test revealed that the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art models and other
ensemble learning classiﬁers with high detection rates of 98.2%, 92.9%, 98.9%, and 99.5% for Flooding,
Scheduling, Grayhole, Blackhole attacks, respectively, in addition to 99.9% for Normal traﬃc. In the
