Sensors 2019, 19, 4383
6 of 20
diﬀerent ﬁelds. Previously, we noted that there are diﬀerent boosting algorithms. Gradient boosting is
considered as the most eﬀective one from these algorithms. Although GB mainly depends on convex
loss function, it can use diﬀerent types of loss functions. Moreover, GB can solve regression and
classiﬁcation problems as well. Concerning classiﬁcation problems, a log loss function is used to be an
objective function to deal with these problems. From a fundamental element point of view, GB uses
negative gradient to enhance the results.
Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) Model
In the last decade, data science has gained more interest for diﬀerent ﬁelds in many applications.
Currently, many big buzzwords such as big data and artiﬁcial intelligence has overwhelmed our lives.
Boosting algorithms also have evolved with time. A well-known boosting model, which has achieved
a high score for solving classiﬁcation and prediction problems in many contests of the KAGGLE
platform, is the extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) model.
In fact, XGBoost is a type of GB that provides an innovative tree searching technique [54].
The improved technique has shown good performance in distributed computing and avoidance of
overﬁtting, as well as in solving problems that have data sparsity. More precisely, computation
complexity is reduced signiﬁcantly with automatic learning in the splitting process. To tackle the
overﬁtting problem, XGBoost appends regular terms to the objective function in the learning phase.
XGBoost applies second-order Taylor expansion to the loss function to substitute the ﬁrst derivative
unlike conventional GB, as given in Equation (3) as follow:
L =
X
i
l(y, O(xi)) +
X
k
Ω(Gk)
(3)
where, l is the loss function of training and L deﬁne real loss function for XGBoost algorithm. The rest
of the notations are constant as the same as boosting methods. G is deﬁned as a weak estimator
for decision tree, while F denotes for prediction. Additionally, decision trees complexity, Ω(Gm) is
aggregated with the ﬁrst term to form the objective function. Regular term deﬁnition, Ω(Gm), is
calculated as:
Ω(G) = wT + 1
2α
T
X
j=1
s2
j)
(4)
where, T is denoting number of decision trees’ leaves. While, w j 2 denotes L2 norm of scores for each
leaf. The γ is a control threshold to split nodes, and λ is a coeﬃcient to reduce overﬁtting problem [55].
The ﬁnal equation can be formed as:
Lm =
N
X
i=1
l(yi, Om−1
i
+ Gm(xi)) + Ω(Gm)
≈
N
X
i=1
h
l(yi, Om−1
i
) + giGm(xi) + 1
2oiG2
m(xi)
i
+ Ω(Gm)
(5)
Finally, in the previous equation, two variables deﬁne the ﬁrst derivative and second derivative of
the loss function, which are gi = ∂Om−1l(yi, Om−1
i
) and oi = ∂2
Om−1l(yi, Om−1
i
), respectively.
2.3. Proposed Genetic-Based Extreme Gradient Boosting (GXGBoot) Model
The basic idea behind the proposed GXGBoot model is to build an optimization task using genetic
algorithm on top of XGBoot classiﬁer to increase the classiﬁcation accuracy of minority classes without
signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the overall accuracy of other classes. The genetic algorithm generates random
values for the XGBoot classiﬁer to form a new decision boundary with a highest genetic ﬁtness value.
