sensors
Article
A Genetic-Based Extreme Gradient Boosting Model
for Detecting Intrusions in Wireless Sensor Networks
Mnahi Alqahtani, Abdu Gumaei *
, Hassan Mathkour and Mohamed Maher Ben Ismail
Department of Computer Science, College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University,
Riyadh 11543, Saudi Arabia; mnahiralqahtani@gmail.com (M.A.); mathkour@ksu.edu.sa (H.M.);
mbenismail@ksu.edu.sa (M.M.B.I.)
* Correspondence: abdugumaei@gmail.com
Received: 2 September 2019; Accepted: 30 September 2019; Published: 10 October 2019


Abstract: An Intrusion detection system is an essential security tool for protecting services and
infrastructures of wireless sensor networks from unseen and unpredictable attacks. Few works of
machine learning have been proposed for intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks and that
have achieved reasonable results. However, these works still need to be more accurate and eﬃcient
against imbalanced data problems in network traﬃc. In this paper, we proposed a new model to
detect intrusion attacks based on a genetic algorithm and an extreme gradient boosting (XGBoot)
classiﬁer, called GXGBoost model. The latter is a gradient boosting model designed for improving
the performance of traditional models to detect minority classes of attacks in the highly imbalanced
data traﬃc of wireless sensor networks. A set of experiments were conducted on wireless sensor
network-detection system (WSN-DS) dataset using holdout and 10 fold cross validation techniques.
The results of 10 fold cross validation tests revealed that the proposed approach outperformed the
state-of-the-art approaches and other ensemble learning classiﬁers with high detection rates of 98.2%,
92.9%, 98.9%, and 99.5% for ﬂooding, scheduling, grayhole, and blackhole attacks, respectively, in
addition to 99.9% for normal traﬃc.
Keywords: intrusion detection system; wireless sensor networks; genetic algorithm; extreme gradient
boosting classiﬁer; WSN-DS
1. Introduction
A wireless sensor network (WSN) is a kind of networks, which can be part of the Internet of
Things (IoT) and is composed of a number of sensor nodes. These nodes are distributed in a wide
range of diﬀerent regions to collect required information and convey them to a central node called
a base station (BS) node or a sink node, which is a more powerful, capable node [1,2]. They are
used in many real-time applications such as security and healthcare monitoring, climate change and
environmental monitoring, and military surveillance systems. Several studies have suggested various
possible ways to overcome possible security threats related to WSNs. They include secure routing,
key exchange, authentication, and other security techniques addressing speciﬁc kinds of intrusions.
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are one of the most ﬂexible and useful tools to prevent diﬀerent
attacks and threats to WSNs.
An IDS is an appropriate tool for detecting intrusion attacks in wired and wireless networks.
When the system detects the intrusion attack, it alerts the controller or supervisor to take proper
decisions [3]. In the last few years, several research works have been published on IDSs for IoT. Some
of them are proposed for mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) [4–6]. The others are related to wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) [7–9], cloud computing [10], and cyber-physical systems [11].
Sensors 2019, 19, 4383; doi:10.3390/s19204383
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
