The WSN intrusion detection model is enhanced using an optimization technique, PL-AOA, for the kNN 
algorithm. It achieved 99% detection accuracy against DoS attacks28. Using traditional kNN, this design enhanced 
the detection accuracy by 10%.It realized a balance between lightweight computation and high intrusion 
performance14,29. Another study proposes a novel technique for IoT-WSN intrusion detection using the BCOA-
MLID technique, which uses a binary chimp optimization algorithm and machine learning. This approach 
outperformed the existing methods, like XGBoost and KNN-AOA, since it achieved a maximum accuracy of 
99.36%.The results indicated that BCOA-MLID exhibited better classification metrics than sensitivity, specificity, 
F-score, and AUC. Its computation time was meager, approximately 7.26 s, which made it suitable for IoT-WSN 
with highly constrained resources28,30,31. Moreover, theFA-ML-based intrusion detection technique in WSN-
IoT integrates the firefly algorithm and machine learning32–35. The study in36 further proved that the developed 
ensemble model in experiments on intrusion detection outperformed the single classifiers, and the accuracy 
rate reached up to 98.8% by using techniques of KNN and boosting. Precision and recall rates had reached up to 
97%.In boosting and stacking ensemble methods, the F1 scores reached 96% and 97%, respectively. This model 
can be highly efficient in detecting cyberattacks in IoT environments. The ensemble-based machine learning 
model using RF proposed in34,37 surpasses the existing intrusion detection methods38–40 by achieving over 99% 
accuracy and a false positive rate. Also, it mitigated the previously prevalent drawbacks in these systems and 
provided a reliable framework for intrusion detection across various public datasets. Many researchers have tried 
to optimize the RF algorithm, but due to certain limitations, the best optimal solution cannot be obtained41–43. 
With an exhaustive literature review, it can be concluded that there exist so many critical research gaps, such 
as (a) much research focuses on selecting different algorithms, the critical aspect of tuning these algorithms 
for the specific context of WSN security to maximize performance requires (b) No Exploring and optimizing 
hybrid intrusion detection modelsand (c) Additionally, feature engineering plays a vital role in improving the 
effectiveness of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), this area needs more consideration.
The contribution of this work is to use a metaheuristic Tabu-Search approach44 for optimizing the performance 
of the RF method in intrusion detection by WSN. It results in better performance than the basic RF approach45. 
This proposed technique is tested in three benchmark datasets: the WSN-DS dataset46,47, the CICIDS 201748,49, 
and the CIC IoT 2023 dataset50,51. A summary of reviewed work has been presented in Table 1.
Proposed methodology
In machine learning, models must deal with numerous parameters and dozens of hyperparameters. The 
combinations of these parameters and hyperparameters became exponential, so selecting the correct combination 
became nearly impossible if anyone followed a manual design approach. Since models like RFs consist of about 
19 hyperparameters, designing an ideal model manually with the correct number of hyperparameters will be 
time-consuming and tedious. This section introduces the TS algorithm and the RF technique, particularly 
emphasizing how TS could improve hyperparameter optimization. Firstly, this paper discusses the TS algorithm 
and its basic properties, as well as the general process of its work. After that, the section proceeds to a more 
general description of the RF method and its properties. Finally, the new proposed method will be described in 
greater detail, how TS is combined with RF, with the goal of optimization.
Tabu-search (TS)
Tabu Search10 is a metaheuristic optimization technique adopted to solve combinatorial optimization problems. 
The TS algorithm iteratively explores the solution space in the hope that, at each step, a better candidate solution 
is found while avoiding getting trapped in local optima. A unique feature of the TS algorithm is the memory 
structure known as the “tabu list” so as not to backtrack to any previously explored solution. TS incrementally 
explores the solution space using move operators to generate new potential solutions and evaluate outcomes. The 
algorithm tracks the solutions already studied in the search process along with the tabu list.
Random forest
RF14,52 is highly popular in machine learning for classification and regression problems since it gives the ensemble 
method: building a “forest” of decision trees from subsets of data and features chosen randomly, averaged to 
make a prediction. This random selection process is based on the principle that decision trees can produce 
more accurate predictions when they use different subsets of data and features than when relying upon a single 
decision tree. Reducing overfitting and enhancing generalization capabilities are the benefits of learning in RF. 
The main benefits of RF in the proposed methodology are as follows: (a) ease of use, (b) minimal preprocessing 
requirements, and (c) ability to handle both categorical and continuous input features.
Optimization methodology
A novel approach based on tabu search optimization53 has been introduced for optimizing RF models. The main 
idea is to combine two powerful concepts:RF’s Parameter Space and Tabu Search as an Efficient Navigator. RFs 
have many parameters, known as hyperparameters (as many as 19), that are hard to tune because they create a 
gigantic and complex space of possible combinations. Tabu Search helps intelligently navigate this space without 
becoming stuck in local optima. It remembers the settings it has previously attempted (in a “tabu list”) and does 
not repeat them, which is time-saving and helps find better solutions. This makes it a valuable technique for 
discovering the optimal settings for a RF model, particularly when straightforward techniques such as trial-and-
error or grid search are ineffective. The flowchart in Fig. 3 illustrates this optimization method in a step-by-step 
way.
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:18634 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-03498-3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
