positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false negatives (FN) to show the classifier’s overall 
classification performance associated with the pre-optimization model. Figure 14 is the ROC AUC (area under 
the curve) curve. The AUC curve shows how well the model can discriminate between classes, while AUC 
reflects how effective the model is overall. Figure 15 displays the confusion matrix for the RF classifier of the 
post-optimization model, hopefully indicating a more accurate classification performance and better balance of 
sensitivity and specificity. Figure 16 displays the ROC AUC curve of the post-optimization model, indicating 
that the model also likely has better discrimination. All four figures allow readers to view the performance of 
pre- and post-optimization, demonstrating improvements.
Implications and future directions
The deep analysis of the experiments above reveals several essential insights about the performance of the RF 
model in the intrusion detection system. It shows good scalability with the performance compared to extensive 
alternatives for handling large data sizes and exhibiting high value for all metrics. In this case, the optimized 
model has an outstanding level of reliability of attack detection in terms of its ability to distinguish between two 
similar patterns of attacks, particularly in such complex Grayhole and TDMA cases, and still maintains low false 
positives for regular traffic and therefore also provides balanced performance across all types of attacks. From an 
operational point of view, although the computational complexity does increase during optimization with more 
trees and a deeper depth, the trade-off is well justified because of the gains obtained in terms of performance 
with high precision that finally leads to the minimization of false alarms in operations and better-than-chance 
performance justified by improved Cohen’s Kappa score. Such results show that an optimized model is suitable 
for real-time network monitoring and automated attack detection systems, thus forming a robust solution for 
the comprehensive management of WSN security in real-time network monitoring, automated attack detection 
systems, and policy enforcement in network security.
Comparison with state-of-the-art techniques
We compared the Tabu Search-optimized Random Forest (TS-RF) model with existing state-of-the-art methods 
in WSN intrusion detection to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Table 6 shows a 
comparison of multiple datasets and evaluation metrics.
The results clearly show the superiority of our TS-RF model over all published state-of-the-art methods in all 
datasets. In particular, on the WSN-DS dataset, the TS-RF model outperforms the best competitor (XGBoost56) 
by 1.05%. Regarding network security, there is much more at stake, and any improvement in accuracy, however 
small, can result in reduced missed detections or false alarms. We see that in the case of the CICIDS2017 
dataset, our method has consistently improved approximately 0.43% over the Decision Tree method in58. When 
considering the CIC-IoT-2023 dataset, the TS-RF method had an accuracy improvement of 0.90% compared to 
Fig. 16.  ROC AUC curve of optimized RF model over CIC-IoT 2023.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:18634 
18
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-03498-3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
