detection have substantial challenges in reaching higher accuracy and exerting acceptable computational 
efficiency, especially in resource-constrained environments8.
Most existing solutions cannot adapt dynamically to changing attacks and network conditions, thus leading 
to higher false positives and missed detections9. Nonetheless, machine learning model optimization in intrusion 
detection for WSN has been left under-explored, with most studies focusing on the choice of algorithm rather 
than on tuning the parameters used10.
Motivation and challenges
As the nature of WSNs is open, they are vulnerable to threats such as eavesdropping, spoofing, and jamming11. 
These vulnerabilities are further exacerbated by sensor nodes’ limited computational power and energy 
constraints, which restrict the implementation of complex security protocols12. Another significant challenge in 
securing WSNs is achieving high intrusion detection accuracy without compromising computational efficiency, 
as resource-intensive methods can quickly drain node energy and degrade network performance13. Also, many 
existing security mechanisms are static and struggle to adapt to the dynamic nature of modern cyberattacks 
and fluctuating network conditions14. This lack of adaptability increased undetected threats, undermining the 
reliability of the network’s defense system.
The novelty of this work is to fill these gaps by proposing a novel approach in which the advantages of TS are 
combined with the RF algorithm and tested over three datasets: WSN-DS, CICIDS 2017, and CIC-IoT 2023.The 
main goals of this work are as follows:
•	 To optimize intrusion detection in WSNs for high accuracy and efficiency using an optimized RF model.
•	 To validate the utility of TS in fine-tuning RF parameters to improve performance.
•	 The proposed approach is evaluated on the extensive WSN-DS, CICIDS 2017, and CIC-IoT 2023 datasets, 
giving an idea about its feasibility over various types of attacks.
This research work contributes to the field of WSN security in the following areas:
•	 Proposing a Tabu Search-optimized RF model that outperforms standard implementations, achieving superi­
or accuracy, precision, recall, ROC AUC, Cohen’s kappa, and F1-score values.
•	 A detailed study of intrusion detection behaviors and performance across all scenarios related to types of 
attacks in WSN, particularly Blackhole, Flooding, Grayhole, and TDMA attacks.
•	 Providing some insights about the impact of hyperparameter optimization on intrusion detection perfor­
mance in resource-constrained environments.
This work expands on recent advancements toward WSN security and optimization scenarios in machine 
learning by accommodating more robust and adaptive intrusion detection systems.
The organization of the paper is as follows. After the introduction in Section "Introduction", the literature 
review is elaborated in Section "Proposed methodology".The proposed model and data analysis are described 
in Sect. 3.The mathematical modeling is presented in Section "Conclusion and future scope".Further, Sect. 5 
provides an experimental evaluation and comprehensive analysis of the results. Section 6 provides comparison 
with state-of-the-art techniques. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes the manuscript and highlights its scope for the future.
Literature review
According to the literature, many researchers have explored machine learning models that aim to design optimal 
intrusion detection systems to achieve high intrusion detection accuracy and reduce vulnerability issues. Still, 
the task is very complex and challenging. This section presents a comparative analysis of similar algorithms 
addressing this problem. All key advancements reviewed in WSN security from 2018 to 2025, along with 
machine learning applications in intrusion detection, with optimizations followed for classification algorithms.
In the literature, SVM-based IDS has achieved 90.8% accuracy using this model15. Among the energy 
efficiency methods, the Firefly algorithm remained an interesting one that achieved a packet delivery ratio of 
91.52% and extended the network lifespan by as much as 89.95%16. With the help of blockchain and federated 
learning, 100% accuracy for binary classification and 99.95% for multiclass has been achieved to classify 
malicious nodes in IoT17. However, techniques like RF, gradient boosting, and SVM have also been elaborated 
for security-enhanced and localization-based improvements18. In addition, proper data transmission and 
energy consumption were guaranteed with the help of trust evaluation and cascading encryption19. Different 
DoS attacks in IoT networks are done using the application of XGBoost for feature selection compared with 
Naive Bayes and Recurrent Neural Networks20. RNN, in an attempt to take snapshots of time patterns, showed 
outstanding performance at 99.7 percent compared to NB, which reached a reasonable accuracy of 97.9 percent; 
therefore, RNN could be very effective in detection in IoT environments21.
Furthermore, multiple intrusion detection strategies for IoT ecosystems were evaluated, exploiting 
quantitative metrics comprising accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and MCC22,23. The performance results 
of the machine learning-based IDS models mostly depicted high accuracy values of over 99%, especially when 
ensemble techniques such as RF and XGBoost were adopted in the models24. Instead, feature engineering and 
transfer learning improvements were emphasized and left as future optimization work25. Another model has 
been proposed that achieved high performance in intrusion detection. Results showed 99.7% accuracy, 99.8% 
precision, and 97.8% recall on the NSL-KDD dataset26. The same high outcomes were seen on other datasets, 
such as UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS 2017, with the model’s efficacy in improving detection accuracy through 
feature reduction and data balancing techniques10,27.
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:18634 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-03498-3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
