Hyperparameter optimization
A Tabu Search algorithm was defined and implemented forhyperparameter tuning, where n_estimators and 
max_depth were experimented with; the best fitting model was selected by maximizing precision.
Optimized model development
The optimized parameters-hyperparameters were used to develop a new RF Classifier, which was later trained 
on training data.
Comparative analysis
The same set of evaluation metrics was used for the original and optimized models for the comparison. 
Confusion matrices and ROC curves were drawn to better visualize the correctlyclassified instances and class 
differentiation. The classification report offers a detailed overview of the performance by class in terms of 
precision, recall, F1 score, and support.
Results interpretation
The performance of the original and optimized models was compared to determine whether the optimization 
process had an effect. It could be seen that improvements were made across several metrics, so it is safe to claim 
the optimized model performs better than the original. Perhaps most importantly, the optimized model handled 
the minority classes much better, which is often a problem when addressing imbalance in a dataset.
Mathematical modeling of RF optimization using Tabu-search
Objective function
The optimization model mainly aims to maximize classification performance as several key performance metrics 
are integrated, each assigned a weighted importance. The model maximizes the function given in Eq. 1 below:
	
F (θ) = w1A (θ) + w2P (θ) + w3R (θ) + w4F1 (θ) + w5K (θ) + w6ROC (θ)
(1)
where θ = (n, d) ϵS represents the solution vector, with n as the number of estimators and d as the maximum 
depth of the model. Each element in the function corresponds to a performance metric:A (θ) is accuracy, 
calculated as follows:(TP + TN)/(TP + TN + FP + FN); P (θ) is precision described as TP/TP + FP; 
R (θ) is the recall can be represented as TP/TP + FN; F1 (θ) is the F1 score, balancing both precision and 
recall as 2(P ∗R)/P + R; K (θ) is Cohen’s Kappa, which measures the agreement between prediction and 
actual outcomes on anything other than a chance basis, as (P0 −Pe)/(1 −Pe); and ROC (θ) is the area under 
the receiver operating characteristic, or AUC, understood as the integral of the true positive rate to the false 
positive rate. Letting the weights be w1, w2, w3, w4,w5, w6 the model allows for varying degrees of aspect 
importance to classification performance through the solution vector θ.
Constraints
The optimization model is constrained over the solution vector,θ = (n, d) with positive integers: the number of 
estimators n and the maximum depth d, that is, n, d ∈Z+. Further, the number of estimators will lie in between 
lower and upper bounds nmin ≤n ≤nmax and the depth will then also lie in between the lower and upper 
bounds of dmin ≤d ≤dmax. Due to these bounding functions, the optimization process will remain within 
feasible and practical limits for the model parameters.
Fig. 3.  Flowchart of proposed methodology.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:18634 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-03498-3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
