Enhancing intrusion detection in 
wireless sensor networks using 
a Tabu search based optimized 
random forest
Vivek Kumar Pandey1, Shiv Prakash1, Tarun Kumar Gupta2, Priyanshu Sinha1, 
Tiansheng Yang3, Rajkumar Singh Rathore4, Lu Wang5, Sabeen Tahir4 & 
Sheikh Tahir Bakhsh4
Intrusion detection in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) is an emerging area of research, given their 
extensive use in sensitive fields like military surveillance, healthcare, environmental monitoring, 
and smart cities. However, WSNs face several security challenges due to their limited computational 
capabilities and energy constraints. Their deployment in open, unattended environments makes 
them especially vulnerable to threats like eavesdropping, interference, and jamming. To address this 
problem, Random Forest (RF) is a popular machine learning model. The RF model can be tweaked 
because of its multiple hyperparameters. Tuning these parameters manually is tedious, as the 
combinations will be exponential. This work presents an enhanced intrusion detection approach by 
integrating Tabu Search (TS) optimization with a RF classifier. As a result, TS will help RF automatically 
search optimal hyperparameters and improve the generalization ability. This work integrates the 
pros of TS with RF. The model was tested on three different datasets, i.e., (a) the WSN-DS dataset, 
(b) CICIDS 2017, and (c) the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset, which shows better results on different metrics 
like precision, recall, F1-score, Cohen’s Kappa, and ROC AUC. Detection of Blackhole and Gray Hole 
attacks also improved, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining metaheuristic optimization with 
ensemble learning for stronger WSN security.
Keywords  Wireless sensor networks (WSNs), Intrusion detection, WSN-DS, Tabu search, Random forest, 
Optimization
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are becoming very important in many applications, including environmental 
monitoring, industrial automation, and smart cities1,2 as shown in Fig. 1. It can be defined as a network composed 
of sparsely distributed, in some cases remote, wireless sensors that cooperate to potentially monitor physical 
or environmental conditions, such as temperature, humidity, sound, vibration, pressure, motion, or any other 
environmental or physical parameter3. In WSN, several sensor nodes collect the data from the environment and 
forward it to the gateway or base station. The base station analyzes and processes the collected data and computes 
valuable information. After that, the base station transmits this data to the control center. The administrator at 
the control center uses this information for further action. The architecture of WSN is shown in Fig. 2. Moreover, 
like other networks, it also suffers from the open nature of wireless communication and sensor nodes’ severe 
resource constraints, making them particularly vulnerable to various security threats4,5. Intrusion detection 
systems are acquiring significant importance within such networks. Recent works on enhanced accuracy and 
efficiency of intrusion detection in WSNs leveraged machine learning techniques based on ensemble methods 
such as RF6. Distributed wireless sensors monitor the environmental and physical parameters in WSN. Thus, 
they resist various types of attacks, such as Blackhole attacks, Flooding attacks, Gray-hole attacks, and TDMA 
attacks7. While significant advances have been made in WSN security, most existing approaches to intrusion 
1Department of Electronics and Communication, University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, India. 2Department of 
Computer Science, Miranda House, University of Delhi, Delhi, India. 3University of South Wales, Llantwit Rd, 
Pontypridd CF37 1DL, UK. 4Department of Computer Science, Cardiff School of Technologies, Cardiff Metropolitan 
University, Llandaff Campus, Western Avenue, Cardiff CF5 2QS, UK. 5Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, 
China. email: shivprakash@allduniv.ac.in; rsrathore@cardiffmet.ac.uk
OPEN
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:18634 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-03498-3
www.nature.com/scientificreports
