It is essential to highlight that technically, the strong data augmentation
applied to both teacher ensemble and student model in KD does not nec-
essarily result in the highest data augmentation strength, as measured by
our Affinity metric (defined in Equation 5). This will be shown and clarified
further in Section 6.1 Table 1. Therefore, in this study, we varied the data
augmentation strengths in ensemble KD. Specifically, in the series of exper-
iments conducted on each dataset, we utilized the entire permutation set of
Tw, Ts, Sw, Ss to construct trials (for example, T1sT2wSs is one trial denota-
tion), and then computed their Affinity to quantify their data augmentation
strength. In practice, for evaluation, we computed our metrics introduced in
Section 4 on both the training set and validation set, considering each trial’s
corresponding data augmentation strength.
6. Results and Analysis
Our comprehensive set of experiments has yielded several intriguing in-
sights into the learning dynamics of Knowledge Distillation (KD) and ex-
plains the fidelity paradox through various data augmentation strengths. We
particularly emphasize the roles of attention map diversity, model fidelity,
and mutual information, as they interact with student performance in terms
of top-1 accuracy and overfitting during both the training and validation
procedures.
6.1. Impact on Attention Map Diversity
Figure 2 Top shows that during training, a consistent decrease is observed
in the Intersection over Union (IoU) of attention maps between different
teacher models with stronger data augmentation.
This decrease is corre-
lated with an increase in the student model’s accuracy. Trial denotations
are also marked as data labels in these scatter plots, together with Table 1
demonstrating their data augmentation strengths.
These Affinity values aid in understanding the data augmentation strengths
and the decreasing tendencies in the scatter plots: Recall that Affinity mea-
sures the offset in data distribution between the original one and the one
after data augmentation captured by the student, and lower Affinity corre-
sponds to higher augmentation strength, leading to higher student accuracy.
As evidence, for those trials with strong data augmentation and low Affinity,
e.g., T1sT2wSs in CIFAR-100, T1wT2sSs in CIFAR-100 imb100, T1sT2wSs in
12
