4.3. Quantify Data Augmentation Strength within Ensemble KD
In our experiments, we employ various data augmentation techniques
on both teacher ensembles and the student model to modulate the level
of randomness introduced into the dataset, as detailed in Section 5.
To
quantify the strength of these applied data augmentations and demonstrate
their effects on KD, we leverage Affinity measurements (Cubuk et al, 2021),
specifically adapted to our KD scenario:
Affinity = Acc(D′
val)
Acc(Dval)
(5)
where Acc(D′
val) denotes the validation accuracy of the student model trained
with augmented distillation dataset and tested on the augmented validation
set. Acc(Dval) represents the accuracy of the same model tested on clean
validation set.
This metric measures the offset in data distribution between the origi-
nal one and the augmented one captured by the student model after KD
training: Higher Affinity value corresponds to smaller offset between the
data distributions. In this paper, Affinity is used as a tool to quantify and
thus help on controlling the degree of randomness injected into the distilla-
tion dataset. This provides us with a systematic approach to analyze how
data augmentation interacts with KD generalization, fidelity, and attention
mechanisms. We anticipate that when the data augmentation strength of
the student model aligns with that of the teacher model, the Affinity will
be higher. And, lower Affinity corresponds to stronger data augmentation,
leading to higher student accuracy and better generalization performance.
It is noteworthy that what we mean low Affinity is a “moderate low but
cannot be as low as 0” notion: An Affinity of 0 presupposes a situation
where the augmented data is so drastically different from the original that
it no longer retains any of the original data’s informative features, or the
model has entirely failed to learn from the augmented data. Our claim that
models with low Affinity can still exhibit good generalization performance is
based on the understanding that these models, through diverse and challeng-
ing augmentationss, learn to abstract and generalize from complex patterns.
This does not necessarily imply that an Affinity of 0, resulting from complete
misalignment with the augmented data, is desirable or indicative of strong
generalization. Instead, we suggest that moderate to low Affinity, within a
range that indicates the model has been challenged but still retains learning
efficacy, can foster robustness and generalization.
10
