related works, Section 3 clarifies the problem and hypothesis focused in this
work, and Section 4 introduces the evaluation metrics used to validate our
argues. Section 5 further gives the experimental settings, and the empirical
results and theoretical analysis are provided in Section 6. Section 7 finally
summarizes the work of this paper.
2. Related Works
Our study contributes to a growing body of research that explores the
interactions between data augmentation, model fidelity, attention mecha-
nisms, and their impact on student performance in Knowledge Distillation
(KD) with teacher ensembles.
In (Bai et al, 2023), a KD framework utilizing Masked Autoencoder, one
of the primary factors influencing student performance is the randomness
introduced by masks in its teacher ensembles. It comes naturally if incorpo-
rating randomness into the dataset, through a simple yet effective method
like data augmentation, and carefully controlling its strength, will be as ef-
fective as integrating it into model architectures.
Theories on the impacts of data augmentation on KD remain diverse and
varied. (Li et al, 2022) offers theoretical insights, suggesting that leveraging
diverse augmented samples to aid the teacher model’s training can enhance its
performance but will not extend the same benefit to the student. (Shen et al,
2022) emphasizes how data augmentation can alter the relative importance
of features, making challenging features more likely to be captured during the
learning process. This effect is analogous to the multi-view data setting in
ensemble learning, suggesting that data augmentation is likely to be beneficial
for ensemble KD.
On the application font, research proposing novel attention-based KD
frameworks usually accompanied with intricate designs in model architec-
tures or data augmentation strategies (¨Ozg¨ur et al, 2022; Lewy et al, 2023).
For instance, studies like (Tian et al, 2022) aim to address the few shot learn-
ing in KD with a novel data augmentation strategy based on the attentional
response of the teacher model. Although their concentration is different from
ours, the study nevertheless shows the significance of attention mechanism
in KD.
In align with the initial “knowledge transfer” definition of KD, as an
underlying assumption that a higher degree of emulation between the student
and teachers benefits its training, previous studies are devoted to optimizing
5
