5. Experimental Setup
In our ensemble Knowledge Distillation (KD), experiments are conducted
with two or three teachers.
Each teacher model is a ResNet50 classifier
pretrained on ImageNet (Deng et al, 2009) and then fine-tuned on their
respective target datasets.
The student model is ResNet18 trained from
scratch using vanilla KD (Hinton et al, 2015). Take the ensemble KD with
two teachers as an example, the loss function is defined as:
LNLL(zs, ys) = −
C
X
c=1
yc log σc(zs)
(6)
LKD1,2(zs, zt1.2) = −τ 2
C
X
c=1
σc(zt1,2
τ
) log σc(zs
τ )
(7)
L = LNLL + 1
2(LKD1 + LKD2)
(8)
where LNLL is the usual supervised cross-entropy between the student logits
zs and the one-hot labels ys. LKD1,2 is the added knowledge distillation term
that encourages the student to match the teacher ensembles.
In this paper, we are focusing on ensemble KD with 2 teachers T1 and
T2. Results with 3 teachers are discussed in Appendix F. We also provide
experiments with Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al, 2021) where
the attention map can be obtained directly with the built-in attention module
in Appendix E.
Experiments are conducted on well-recognized long-tailed datasets ImageNet-
LT (Liu et al, 2019), CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) with an imbalanced factor
of 100, and their balanced counterparts. Hyperparameters remain consistent
across experiments for each dataset. More detailed settings, including learn-
ing rates and temperatures, are provided in Appendix A.
In this paper, we distinguish between two types of data augmentation:
(1) Weak data augmentation, encompassing conventional methods such as
random resized crop, random horizontal flip, and color jitters. (2) Strong
data augmentation, which includes RandAugment (RA) (Cubuk et al, 2020)
applied on the ImageNet-LT dataset and AutoAugment (AA) (Cubuk et al,
2019) applied on all other datasets. For denotation purposes, we use Ts, Ss to
represent teacher or student models trained with strong augmentation, while
Tw, Sw denote those trained with weak augmentation.
11
