towards increased student-teacher fidelity or mutual information (Wang et
al, 2022; Li et al, 2022; Lao et al, 2023). Recent work (Sun et al, 2024) also
optimizes in this direction, where a z-score logit standardization process is
proposed to mitigate the logits matching difficulties caused by logit shift and
variance match between teacher and student. Nevertheless, this idea faced
initial challenge in (Stanton et al, 2021), indicating that closely replicating
the teacher’s behavior does not consistently lead to significantly improved
student generalization performance during testing, whether in self-distillation
or ensemble distillation.
(Stanton et al, 2021) first investigates if the low-fidelity is an identifiability
problem that can be solved by augmenting the dataset, and the answer is
no: experimental results show subtle benefits of this increased distillation
dataset. They further explore if the low-fidelity is an optimization problem
resulting in a failure of the student to match the teacher even on the original
training dataset, and their answer is yes: A shared initialization does make
the student slightly more similar to the teacher in activation space, but in
function space the results are indistinguishable from randomly initialized
students.
Though insightful, it prompts further questions and drives us to think:
Is low-fidelity truly undesirable and problematic for KD, especially if it does
not harm student performance? Thus, additional exploration into this stu-
dent fidelity-performance relation is required to elucidate the above paradox.
Adopting a similar investigative approach which observes model fidelity vari-
ations with different data augmentations, we tailor it to our case, exercising
a more cautious control over the data augmentation strength and thus the
randomness into the distillation dataset during KD training.
In our work, we applied various data augmentations on KD, aiming to
provide a more comprehensive understanding of model fidelity and atten-
tion mechanisms. Our empirical results and theoretical analysis challenge
conventional wisdom, supporting and extending (Stanton et al, 2021) by
demonstrating that student-teacher fidelity or mutual information does de-
crease with improved student performance during KD training. And, this
low-fidelity phenomenon can hardly be mitigated with optimization aimed
at improving student generalization. We thus advocate for more cautious
practices in future research when designing KD strategies.
6
