increases attention divergence, enabling teachers to offer a broader perspec-
tive to the student. Consequently, the student surpasses the knowledge of a
single teacher, becoming more independent, and the observed low-fidelity is
a demonstration of this phenomenon rather than a pathology.
6.3. Effects of Logits Matching Optimization on KD
Although (Stanton et al, 2021) has shown the phenomenon of low-fidelity,
they attributed the challenges in optimization as the key factor for the stu-
dent’s inability to match the teacher. Recent studies, such as (Sun et al,
2024), continue to focus on optimizing the student-teacher logits matching
process. Yet in Section 3 the 3rd hypothesis, we suggested that the optimiza-
tion towards increasing student-teacher mimicry behavior in fact benefits
generalization performance rather than the fidelity.
To illustrate, here we compared the aforementioned vanilla KD with a
logits-matching optimization method in KD (Sun et al, 2024) under differ-
ent data augmentation strengths, for dataset CIFAR100, CIFAR100-imb100,
and ImageNet-LT. Specifically, we experiment with a z-score standardization
method applied on logits before the softmax. This mitigates the logits mag-
nitudes and variance gap between teacher and student, which facilitates the
student-teacher emulation procedure.
Theoretically, denote the logits of teacher model and student model as
zt and zs respectively, and the softmax function as σ(·). Then for a finally
well-distilled student with predicted probability density perfectly matching
the teacher, i.e., σ(zs) = σ(zt), we have the following two properties proved
in (Sun et al, 2024):
Logit shift: zs = zt + ∆
(10)
Variance match: Var(zs)
Var(zt) = τs
τt
(11)
Where ∆can be considered constant for each sample image, and τs, τt
are temperatures for the student and teacher respectively during training.
That is, even for the student with highest fidelity to its teacher such that
σc(zs) = σc(zt) for any class c in the dataset, still we have zs = pτs
τt · zt + ∆
which means the student logits cannot match the teacher logtis. A z-score
normalization applied on both the student and teacher logits during KD
training can soothe this mismatch by making their logtis distribution equal
16
