models in ensemble KD to help elucidate the existing fidelity paradox.
Following the investigation paradigm in (Stanton et al, 2021), where the
model fidelity variations were observed with different data augmentations,
we adapt this paradigm to our case with a more cautious control over the
degree of randomness in augmentation during ensemble KD training. By
varying data augmentation strengths, measured by Affinity (Cubuk et al,
2021), we varied the model diversities trained on them. Impacts not only
on traditional metrics like student-teacher fidelity, but also on less-explored
aspects of attention maps diversity between different teachers, and mutual
information between student and teachers are witnessed. Our empirical ob-
servations appear to challenge the traditional wisdom on the student-teacher
relationship in distillation during training procedure and thus provide further
insights on explaining the fidelity paradox.
Specifically, in support and further complement to (Stanton et al, 2021),
we highlight attention map diversification existed within teacher ensembles
as a deeper reason why a student with good generalization performance may
be unable to match the teacher during KD training: Stronger data aug-
mentation increases attention divergence in the teacher ensemble, enabling
teachers to offer a broader perspective to the student. Consequently, the stu-
dent surpassing the knowledge of single teacher becomes more independent as
measured by lower student-teacher mutual information. And the low-fidelity
observed is a demonstration of this phenomenon.
Furthermore, though (Stanton et al, 2021) has demonstrated the low-
fidelity observation, they still proposed the difficulties in optimization as the
primary reason for it. And recent works including (Sun et al, 2024) remain
optimizing in the direction of facilitating the student-teacher emulation pro-
cedure. Yet our empirical and theoretically analysis demonstrate that, opti-
mization with logits matching does improve the student generalization ability
but is still at the cost of fidelity reduction.
Our primary goal is to explain the fidelity paradox and understand the
student learning and knowledge transfer dynamics in ensemble KD, by ob-
serving the implications of data augmentation on the student-teacher rela-
tionship. By doing so, we seek to provide insights that challenge the tradi-
tional or extend preliminary wisdom in KD fidelity by leveraging the atten-
tion mechanism in ensemble learning. As shown in Figure 1, we summarize
our contributions as follows:
(1) We demonstrate the correlation between teachers’ attention map di-
3
