Figure 1: Left: Attention map visualizations for teacher ensembles and student model
in Knowledge Distillation (KD) on ImageNet dataset.
Stronger data augmentation
(T1wT2sSs and T1sT2wSs in this case) as measured by Affinity improves teachers’ at-
tentional divergence, thus providing the student a more comprehensive perspective on
the overall characteristics of the target images, leading to a better generalization abil-
ity. Middle and Right: Scatter plots of Intersection over Union (IoU) in Attention maps,
and Fidelity between teacher ensembles and student during KD training. The decreasing
tendency in fidelity challenges the conventional wisdom that higher fidelity consistently
correlate with better student performance. Later we will demonstrate that the low-fidelity
observation is caused by attention map diversification existed within teacher ensembles,
and even optimization towards logits-matching can hardly mitigate this low-fidelity effect.
versity and student model accuracy in ensemble KD training. Stronger
data augmentation improves attentional divergence among teacher mod-
els, offering the student a more comprehensive perspective.
(2) We affirm the viewpoint from (Stanton et al, 2021) that higher fidelity
between teachers and student does not consistently improve student
performance. What is more, through analyzing attention maps between
teachers in ensemble KD, we highlight this low-fidelity phenomenon as
an underlying characteristic rather than a pathology: Student’s gener-
alization is enhanced with more diverse teacher models, which causes
the reduction in student-teacher fidelity.
(3) We further investigate if optimization towards facilitating the student-
teacher logits matching procedure can enhance the KD fidelity. Our
empirical and theoretically analysis demonstrate that such optimization
improve the student generalization ability but still at the cost of fidelity
reduction.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 summarizes the
4
