1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton et al, 2015) is renowned for its effec-
tiveness in deep model compression and enhancement, emerging as a critical
technique for knowledge transfer. Previously, this process has been under-
stood and evaluated through model fidelity (Stanton et al, 2021), measured
by the student model replication degree to its teachers. High fidelity, assessed
by metrics like low averaged predictive Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and
high top-1 agreement (Stanton et al, 2021), have conventionally been used
to assess the success of KD.
While fidelity has traditionally guided enhancements in model architec-
tures, optimization, and training frameworks, repeated high-fidelity results
corresponding to strong student performance seem to indicate that a high
degree of mimicry between the student and teachers is desirable (Wang et al,
2022; Li et al, 2022; Lao et al, 2023). Yet this notion was initially challenged
in (Stanton et al, 2021), which empirically shows that good student accuracy
does not imply good distillation fidelity in self and ensemble distillation.
However, though (Stanton et al, 2021) underscores their empirical findings
on the low-fidelity phenomenon, they still believe that closely matching the
teacher is beneficial for KD in terms of knowledge transfer. Further, they
identify optimization difficulties as one key reason of student’s poor emula-
tion behavior to its teachers. Thus, this paradox highlights a need for further
exploration on model fidelity and its mechanism in KD.
Among factors in KD analysis, the attention map mechanism serves as
a pivotal role in understanding the student-teacher interplay. It is known
that in ensemble learning, diverse models improve the overall performance,
and one can check their diversities through looking into the attention maps.
Nonetheless, whether we can take it granted to transferring this conclusion
into the case of KD has not been systematically studied yet. For example,
(Tsantekidis et al, 2021) empirically shows that diversifying teachers’ learnt
policies by training them in different subsets of learning environment, can en-
hance the distilled student performance in KD. Yet, a theoretical foundation
is lack for doing so. And it would be intriguing to check the student-teacher
fidelity under such circumstance, to see if diversifying teacher models in an
ensemble consistently corresponds with low-fidelity as well. If so, one can de-
vote model attention map diversities to explain the existing fidelity paradox.
Thus in this paper, we utilize the Intersection over Union (IoU) (Rezatofighi
et al, 2019) of attention maps (Zhou et al, 2016) between different teacher
2
