3. Problem and Hypothesis
We focus on Knowledge Distillation (KD) with teacher ensembles in su-
pervised image classification. In this realm, the efficacy of the process has
traditionally been evaluated through the model fidelity and student valida-
tion accuracy. However, this conventional approach may not fully capture
the complexity and nuances inherent in the knowledge transfer process, es-
pecially in light of evolving practices like data augmentation and the growing
importance of attention mechanisms in neural networks. This study is driven
by a series of interconnected research questions that challenge and extend the
traditional understanding of KD as follows.
Impact of Varied Data Augmentation Strengths on Model Di-
versity in Attention Map Mechanisms. The application of diverse data
augmentation strengths during the training of teacher and student models
plays a crucial role in shaping KD (Stanton et al, 2021).
Consequently,
it is natural to inquire whether, across augmentation strategies, stronger
data augmentation results in an increase or decrease in model fidelity within
teacher ensembles during training. And if so, how does this correlate with
the student model’s performance. Inspired by the theory in machine learn-
ing that diversity among models can enhance ensemble learning performance
(Zhou, 2012; Asif et al, 2019), our hypothesis is that varying augmentation
strengths in different teachersinject randomness into the data, thereby diver-
sifying teacher models’ attention (Zhou et al, 2016) mechanisms trained on
them. This diversity promotes heterogeneity in learning features, enables the
student to learn diverse solutions to the target problem, and thus enhances
the KD process. As a result, the student surpasses the knowledge of a single
teacher, leading to a better overall performance, and the observed low-fidelity
serves as a demonstration of this phenomenon.
Interplay Between Student Fidelity, Mutual Information and
Generalization.
(Stanton et al, 2021; Shrivastava et al, 2023) have ob-
served that fidelity or mutual information between teacher and student mod-
els interact with varying data augmentation strengths, influencing the overall
effectiveness of distilled knowledge. The critical questions then arise: Does
lower or higher fidelity and mutual information benefit the KD training and
student performance, and why does it happen? We hypothesize that, varied
augmentation strengths in different teachers in ensemble KD would provide
a broader view for the student to learn. Thus, the student surpassing the
knowledge of a specific teacher. Contrary to the traditional perspective, we
7
