expect a decreased mimicry behavior of the student to benefit the student
generalization ability during training, as it learns more intricate patterns
from the diverse set of teachers.
Effect of Optimization towards Student-Teacher Logits Match-
ing on Fidelity. Question also comes on why some works thought a high-
fidelity is beneficial, while others thought a low-fidelity is inevitable during
training. Our intuition is that the researches devoted to optimizing towards
increased student-teacher fidelity or mutual information do achieve the ulti-
mate goal of improving the overall student performance, but in fact fail at
enhancing the mimicry behavior during training. In this paper, we try to an-
swer this question by delving into a logits matching KD case as in (Sun et al,
2024). Specifically, we experiment with a z-score standardization method to
mitigate the logits magnitudes and variance gap between teacher and student,
which facilitates the student-teacher emulation procedure. Our hypothesis
is that though such an optimization can relieve the logit shift and variance
match problem, in reality its benefit lies in the student generalization rather
than the fidelity improvement.
These questions aim to dissect the underlying learning dynamics in KD,
moving beyond traditional metrics and exploring how newer facets like data
augmentation strength, attention map diversity, fidelity and mutual informa-
tion interplay to influence the student’s learning and generalization abilities.
Here, the data augmentation strength is measured by Affinity (Cubuk et al,
2021), the offset in data distribution between the original one and the one
after data augmentation as captured by the student model, which we will
talk more later. By addressing these questions, this study seeks to provide a
more comprehensive understanding of KD.
4. Evaluation Metrics
This section introduces evaluation metrics aimed at quantifying the learn-
ing dynamics and thus explains the existing fidelity paradox of Knowledge
Distillation (KD) with teacher ensemble training, particularly when subject
to varied data augmentation strengths.
4.1. IoU in Attention Maps
To elucidate divergent attentional patterns within teacher ensembles, we
examine their attention maps (Zhou et al, 2016) in ResNet (He et al, 2016) or
Transformer (Vaswani et al, 2017) during the training and validation stage.
8
