Y. Y. Ghadi et al.: ML Solutions for the Security of WSNs: A Review
FIGURE 6. Supervising learning process [56].
However, supervised learning requires a lot of time and
CPU resources during the training phase, so it is unsuitable
for use in programs requiring real-time results. On the other
hand, it is very effective and accurate in predicting future
samples.
C. K-NEAREST NEIGHBOR
The KNN classification algorithm is considered one of the
most challenging ML applications in real-world situations.
This strategy assumes that a given sample belongs to the
same group as the k-feature vector samples closest to it.
The practical use of the K-Nearest technique can be seen by
including a new element in the training data set. The data are
categorized accordingly once the machine finds the k samples
with the highest similarity [57].
D. DECISION TREE
The DT technique begins by gathering a list of relevant
information. The meaning of each piece of information is
indicated by assigning it a numerical value called a tree
leaf. Predictive modelling is a technique used in various
fields, such as statistics, data mining, and map learning.
Trees visually represent the number of variables, with each
tree representing a possible conclusion. The leaves of these
trees are structurally and visually similar to those of natural
tree species [58]. The term ‘‘regression trees’’ often means
indecision trees focusing on continuous variables that show
variation over time in linear regression. DTs are also part
of analysis trees. However, the classification tree results are
considered when making a decision [59].
E. RANDOM FOREST
RF can generate more accurate predictions for a given dataset
because it integrates the results of many DTs working with
different subsets of data. The RF model differs from previous
iterations in that it only uses the output of a single DT. Based
on the principles of this particular theory, many decision trees
(DTs) are believed to yield more favorable outcomes than the
DT’s implementation. Accuracy and avoidance of overfitting
FIGURE 7. The SVM method [62].
can be improved by increasing the number of trees used in the
analysis [60].
F. SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINE
The SVM technique applies classification and regression
tasks in the domain of supervised ML. The main goal of
this methodology is to categorize the data by assigning a
numerical value to each feature based on its position in
n-dimensional space after moving each data point to that
position [61]. The first step in categorizing objects is to
identify the boundary between the two different groups of
objects (see Figure 7)
G. NAÏVE BAYES
The Naive Bayes classification approach assumes that
expertise is not required at any stage of the attribute formation
process. The first step is to find the probability distribution
of inputs and outputs within a given training data set using
a unique theoretical framework based on feature conditions.
The model uses Bayes’ theorem to find the output variable
y that optimizes the likelihood of future outcomes given a
specific input variable x [63]. For the classifier to perform
optimally, the training data used for its training process must
contain the imperative. By using this methodology, the results
will be maximally precise. During training, the algorithm
generates classification rules to categorize the given data.
Next, let’s change the order of the predictions based on
these criteria. Because the training process is supervised, the
classifications used to train the naive Bayesian classifier are
assumed to be predetermined and known [64].
H. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK (ANN)
A model for sorting data called ANN follows the function of
human neurons. An ANN uses many neurons or functional
units to analyze data and provide accurate results. Layers
VOLUME 12, 2024
12707
