Y. Y. Ghadi et al.: ML Solutions for the Security of WSNs: A Review
protocols can be modified for use over various network
media, such as Bluetooth [32], low-power WLAN [33], and
sub-1 gigahertz radio frequencies. In addition, the network
in your home can be monitored intelligently and remotely.
In addition, it offers a large number of cost-effective and
energy-efficient nodes. The accessible data transmission over
long distances made this possible. Compared to alternative
systems, ZigBee can mitigate channel failures. It uses the
latest security technology to protect the data, uses the
latest security technology, and implements additional security
measures [34]. In contrast, 6LoWPAN, due to its lower
power requirements, represents an ideal choice for low-power
consumption (IP) devices such as controllers and sensors.
WSN nodes have comparable functionality to existing proto-
cols but have operational performance and power headroom
limitations [35]. The charging infrastructure in certain areas
can pose difficulties due to the different nature of the WSNs,
which are designed to operate under many conditions [36].
A possible solution to this problem is reducing the safety
requirements while increasing the battery’s capacity. Figure 3
comprehensively shows the essential components that form
the basis for many technologies.
FIGURE 3. WSN management protocols [25].
The individual elements of a WSN can be powered by
sustainable and renewable sources such as wind, thermal,
and solar energy. Given the complexity and advanced nature
of WSN technology, several of the proposed solutions
appear impractical. Nevertheless, it is more likely that data
could be compromised if security measures are insufficient
[37].WSNs have demonstrated their use in different scenar-
ios, as shown in Figure 4. The applications mentioned above
include military operations [38], health surveillance [39],
industrial process automation [40], and intelligent living
environments [41]. Various companies have made more
than fifty efforts to improve the goal of Layer 6LoWPAN-
based thread technology. Thread’s primary purpose is to
FIGURE 4. WSN management protocols [43].
facilitate user connectivity and management of smart home
devices [42].
Disturbances, losses, and collisions can affect the connec-
tivity and function of a network. Nonetheless, it is crucial
to acknowledge the existence of significant privacy and
security issues [40]. Impeding access and communication
is commonly referred to as an active attack. Conversely,
depending on contextual factors, certain acts of aggression
can be classified as passive or active. However, these
layers are assigned different responsibilities to ensure the
data’s security throughout storage and transmission between
network points. The physical layer improves network per-
formance by mitigating the effects of shadows and route
loss. Error detection and correction techniques are used
to establish a connection between the data link layer in
WSNs [41].
The network layer determines how to transmit data to
the top-level router. In a WSN, each node acts as a router,
facilitating data routing. The security protocols implemented
at this level are intended to prevent unauthorized persons
from accessing the communication channel. The transport
layer is responsible for managing data transfer to external
networks. In contrast, the application layer takes responsibil-
ity for data collection, management, and arrangement [42].
Solving identification remains a significant concern that
requires attention to ensure the security of WSNs. This
unique identification technique makes exploiting the network
impossible for malicious WSN nodes. In addition to these
areas, the security sector uses encryption and decryption
methods to protect WSNs and their users. Due to the inherent
limitations of WSNs, scientists are actively investigating
alternative security solutions, as indicated by reference [43].
The concept of non-repudiation is essential in the field of
network security. Therefore, any WSN device must be able
to document its activities in the event of a security breach.
(Table 3 lists several hazards associated with WSN layers).
Additionally, the ease with which unauthorized persons
could gain direct access to the network is facilitated by the
12704
VOLUME 12, 2024
