Y. Y. Ghadi et al.: ML Solutions for the Security of WSNs: A Review
UMAIR AHMAD SALARIA received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from The Univer-
sity of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Muzaffarabad,
in 2010, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engi-
neering from the Mirpur University of Science and
Technology, Mirpur, Azad Jammu and Kashmir,
in 2013, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree. Since 2014, he has been a Lecturer with
the Department of Electrical Engineering, The
University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. His
research interests include power system optimization, smart grids, and
metaheuristic techniques.
ARFAN AHMED received the Ph.D. degree in applying software algorithms
to predict chemotherapy response in breast cancer patients. He has a
computer science background having spent time in industry. He was
with world-class universities, including Imperial College London and
the University of Birmingham, mainly on decision support systems in
collaboration with the National Health Service (NHS), U.K. He worked on
developing an AI-driven chatbot for anxiety and depression patients with
HBKU CSE. He is currently with the AI Center for Precision Health, Weill
Cornell Medicine—Qatar, working on projects utilizing AI and wearable
devices for diabetes and mental health. He has many publications in
collaboration with renowned scholars in the field of AI and health in high-
impact journals.
HABIB
HAMAM
(Senior
Member,
IEEE)
received
the
B.Eng.
and
M.Sc.
degrees
in
information processing from the Technical Uni-
versity of Munich, Germany, 1988 and 1992,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in physics
and applications in telecommunications from
the University of Rennes 1 conjointly with
the France Telecom Graduate School, France,
in 1995, and the Postdoctoral Diploma degree
‘‘Accreditation to Supervise Research in Signal
Processing and Telecommunications’’ from the University of Rennes 1,
in 2004. From 2006 to 2016, he was the Canada Research Chair of Optics
in Information and Communication Technologies, the most prestigious
research position in Canada which he held for a decade. The title is awarded
by the Head of the Government of Canada after a selection by an international
scientific jury in the related field. He is currently a Full Professor with the
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Moncton. His research
interests include optical telecommunications, wireless communications,
diffraction, fiber components, RFID, information processing, the IoT, data
protection, COVID-19, and deep learning. He is a Senior Member of OSA
and a Registered Professional Engineer in New Brunswick. He was a
recipient of several pedagogical and scientific awards. He is among others
the Editor-in-Chief and the Founder of CIT-Review Journal, an Academic
Editor of Applied Sciences, and an Associate Editor of the IEEE Canadian
Review. He also served as a guest editor in several journals.
VOLUME 12, 2024
12719
