Y. Y. Ghadi et al.: ML Solutions for the Security of WSNs: A Review
FIGURE 9. CNN [77].
[76]. Figure 9 illustrates the development and usage of the
CNN algorithm.
E. RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS (RNN)
RNNs can identify and modify patterns in many situations,
greatly benefiting them in various fields such as genetic
code manipulation and machine translation. RNNs have
a mechanism called ‘‘memory’’ that facilitates the gen-
eration of current and future results by leveraging input
information from previous instances. RNNs exhibit different
characteristics from other deep neural networks due to their
frequent lack of connection between inputs and output [78].
Nevertheless, RNN considers the preservation of long-term
memory to be complex. Passing knowledge from generation
to generation can be challenging when the information
sequence or arrangement is imprecise.
F. LONG-TERM SHORT MEMORY
RNNs with LSTM have gained attention due to their
exceptional ability to store and retrieve past information. The
over-reliance on quick fixes has significantly influenced the
development of LSTM models. The transmission of environ-
mental information occurs sequentially through connected
cells, with each cell serving as an information channel and
resembling a complex system of communication pathways.
The likelihood of memory loss decreases when engaging in
learning and remembering processes, as knowledge acquired
in the past can be used effectively in the present. The cell’s
content can be modified by adding or removing information
during movement [79].
G. MULTI-LAYER PERCEPTRON (MLP)
MLP is an example of a feedforward network, sometimes
called ANN. A linear perceptron can allow fundamentally
identical elements to be distinguished linearly due to multiple
layers and non-linear activation functions. MLP includes
nodes involved in the transmission and reception of data.
Activation of this neuron involves stimulating network nodes
that are not directly connected to the input nodes, which is
achieved using a nonlinear activation function. During the
training process, MLP uses the backpropagation algorithm
and targeted learning techniques [80].
FIGURE 10. WSN security chalenges [25].
H. BACKPROPAGATION NEURAL NETWORKS (BNN)
BNN can be used to modify deep feedforward neural
networks. Supervised learning methods such as stochastic
gradient descent train feed-forward neural networks. During
the training of NN, the use of grade drop involves the
computer calculating the loss rate. The loss rate serves as a
measure to quantify the extent of the deviation between the
observed labels and the expected labels. Through a series
of iterative training sessions, the model’s loss function can
be minimized by changing each weight separately [78]. In a
feedforward neural network, the backpropagation algorithm
calculates the changes that must be made from the output
layer to the input layer. The height of a particular layer within
a multi-layer system can be determined by summing the
slopes of the layers below [79]. This can be achieved before
the specific height of the target layer is determined.
VI. WSN SECURITY CHALLENGES
Engineers can use WSN to design and develop systems with
accurate functionality and the ability to send data across the
entire layer in real-time seamlessly. Including this extra layer
compromises the overall design of the network as it uses
unencrypted Wi-Fi channels [17]. The above aspect is the
main factor in the difficulty involved. Although WSN nodes
can cause several problems, most of these difficulties are
related to security and can be traced back to concerns [83].
Due to the inherent challenges in realizing the network,
as mentioned earlier, the confidentiality of private data on
WSN is at risk (see Figure 10).
A. ABSENCE OF CENTRALIZED CONTROL
When WSN nodes are placed close to each other, they can
independently perform activities like authentication without
the awareness layer [84]. It is essential to use processes
that allow the exchange of authentications between adjacent
nodes and the grouping of WSN nodes into clusters [85].
B. WSNs TOPOLOGY CHANGES
WSN nodes may be moved to different locations while the
environment in which they operate may change. In addition,
there is a possibility that new nodes will be integrated into
the network while current nodes may be eliminated [86]. The
above aspects contribute to the continuous modifications of
VOLUME 12, 2024
12709
