Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
13 of 26
the iterative parameters converge toward the optimal values, substantially influencing the
training speed.
Previous hyperparameter optimization methods, such as random and grid search,
were time-consuming but did not fully use the ranges. Thus, in this study, a GSWO
approach was used to fine-tune the hyperparameters of CatBoost, and prior data were
used to investigate the likely optimal parameter combination. Consequently, the GSWO-
CatBoost hybrid algorithm was created.
4.4. Applying GSWO for Feature Selection
To apply the GSWO algorithm to a specific task, defining the total iteration (M),
the number of crossovers (G), the number of whales in the population (N), and the form
of each whale in the population as input and a fitness function as the target for this
algorithm is required. The output is the candidate whale with the lowest fitness value.
In this section, we apply GSWO for FS. To begin with, the total iteration (M), the number of
crossovers (G), and the number of feature subsets in the population (N) are considered to be
hyperparameters, which vary based on a specific dataset. These hyperparameters must be
chosen pertinently to ensure that the GSWO can achieve the most useful feature subset and
optimize the computational time. In addition, the form of whales in the input population,
a feature subset, is illustrated as binary arrays comprising 0s and 1s. In this representation,
a position of a feature marked 0 implies exclusion, whereas a position of another feature
marked 1 implies inclusion in the feature subset for calculating fitness value. Therefore,
a feature subset in the input population⃗Xt
i is characterized as a binary array of dimensions
D, which is the number of whole features in a specific dataset. For instance, the WSN-DS
dataset [46] has eighteen features. Through comprehensive experiments for this dataset,
the total iteration (M), the number of crossovers (G), and the number of feature subsets
in the population (N) are set as 30, 20, and 30, respectively. An initial population that has
30 feature subsets can be depicted in Figure 5. Note that an initial population is initialized
randomly because the algorithm will update the feature subsets in the population to find
the best subset, including only the useful features, to minimize the fitness function.
Figure 5. An example of an input whale population for FS.
Subsequently, the fitness function for FS is defined in Equation (16), where the value of
the weight β is set as 0.9 through comprehensive experiments in this study; err(⃗Xt
i) is the
false prediction rate of the CatBoost model, which is gained from training and evaluating
it on a particular dataset with the features in a feature subset⃗Xt
i; sum(⃗Xt
i) is the sum of
features in the feature subset⃗Xt
i, such as sum(⃗X1
1) = 8, as depicted in Figure 5.
Fiti = β × err(⃗Xt
i) + (1 −β) × sum(⃗Xt
i)
D
.
(16)
The fitness function is a weighted sum of the classification model error and the
proportion of features present in the candidate solution. Therefore, the optimization goal
involves minimizing the fitness function. This fitness function ensures a reduction in the
rate of false predictions and that as few features as possible are maintained.
Finally, Algorithm 1 is applied to run the GSWO algorithm 30 rounds. As a result,
a feature subset with the lowest fitness value, corresponding to the most useful features
subset, is determined. Figure 6 illustrates that the second feature subset, which has the
lowest fitness value, is chosen as the output of GSWO for FS. In summary, the most useful
