Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
4 of 26
2.2. Metaheuristic Optimization Inspired Feature Selection for Intrusion Detection
Jiang et al. [27] introduced SLGBM, an IDS tailored for WSNs. This study integrated
the Sequence Backward Feature Selection (SBS) algorithm with the LightGBM classification
algorithm to enhance the detection rate while mitigating computational overhead. Through
experimentation utilizing the WSN-DS dataset, the SLGBM method demonstrated superior
performance in terms of the F1-score for the four types of network attacks compared with
existing detection methods. However, this study did not explicitly address the scalability
of the SLGBM method.
Liu et al. [28] proposed a particle swarm optimization-based gradient descent (PSO-
LightGBM) model for intrusion detection in IoT, which aimed to address the limitations of
traditional intrusion detection technology in a complex and changeable IoT environment.
The model uses PSO-LightGBM to extract features from the data and input them into a one-
class SVM (OCSVM) for the discovery and identification of malicious data. The proposed
model performs well in terms of accuracy and false alarm rate (FAR) and shows good
robustness and reliability on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. However, there have been no
comparisons in terms of effectiveness between PSO and other metaheuristic algorithms.
Vijayanand et al. [29] presented a novel FS approach combining WOA and genetic
operators sequentially to enhance the accuracy of IDSs within Wireless Mesh Networks
(WMN) utilizing Support Vector Machines (SVM). This study replaced the probing compo-
nent of WOA with crossover and mutation operators. A performance evaluation conducted
on the CICIDS2017 and ADFA-LD standard datasets showed the method’s superiority
over conventional WOA and GA in terms of attack detection rate, accuracy, and suitability.
However, this study did not provide insights into the efficiency of the proposed method
compared to other metaheuristic algorithms.
Hussain et al. [30] proposed an IDS designed specifically for WSNs, utilizing a CNN
architecture for classification and a hybrid WOA–artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm for
FS. When combined with the recommended CNN architecture, this method outperformed
PSO and achieved an overall accuracy of 98%, according to the experimental evaluation
on the NSL-KDD dataset. However, it is important to mention that the hybrid WOA-
ABC algorithm, which combines two large optimization algorithms, might increase the
computing complexity and resource requirement.
Mohiuddin et al. [31] presented an effective IDS that combines a whale optimization
technique, which is a modified wrapper-based algorithm with a sine-cosine FS algorithm
and a Weighted Extreme Gradient Boosting (XgBoost) classifier. The objective of this
method is to enhance the prediction quality and prevent local optima by broadening the
search and effectively selecting an ideal solution using the sine–cosine function. Using
the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS datasets, the proposed model successfully classified bi-
nary and multi-class attacks with notable accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score metrics.
Nevertheless, significant constraints exist concerning the scalability, computational effi-
ciency, and applicability of the proposed model to various network contexts that have not
been discussed.
Kasongo et al. [32] proposed a method that employs a GA for FS and a random forest
(RF) model for classification within an IDS designed for Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
networks. The GA-RF approach attained a test accuracy of 87.61% and an Area Under
the Curve (AUC) of 0.98 for binary classification, demonstrating superior performance
compared with existing IDS frameworks. The effectiveness and robustness of the proposed
approach are evaluated using the UNSW-NB15 dataset. This methodology integrates the
advantages of GA for FS and RF for classification, thereby enhancing the security, privacy,
and integrity of IIoT networks.
A thorough analysis of the aforementioned studies on WSN intrusion detection specifi-
cally concentrates on FS inspired by metaheuristic optimization, with a particular emphasis
on the WOA, revealing significant trends and unmet needs. First, more research is needed
to determine whether these metaheuristic optimization-based FS techniques, particularly
WOA, are applicable and scalable in a variety of large-scale network contexts. Secondly,
