Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
11 of 26
techniques: encircling prey technique and Bubble-net attack technique, while there is only
one technique, searching for prey, to explore and expand the search area. A parallel branch
of the genetics operator is proposed to address the problem of an imbalance between
exploration and exploitation in this optimization algorithm. Exploitative and exploratory
subpopulations were copied and stored in a new matrix to perform genetic operators.
For this branch, the position of each whale is considered as a chromosome. Our proposed
method performs a crossover between a good individual and a poor individual to create
more diversity instead of a crossover between two good individuals, as in the traditional
GA, which creates two new nearly identical chromosomes similar to the parents, leading to
less diversity. Another point that makes our technique suitable for combination with WOA
is that it only takes one child with more chromosomes from a good parent, which is the
individual in exploitative subpopulations. Furthermore, to avoid bias in the exploration
phase, we propose the formula presented in Equation (14) to control the number of genes
changing among parents and retain some informative chromosomes. After that, we used a
traditional mutation method.
k = round(0.5 × O −0.4 × O × t
M),
(14)
where k is the number of genes performing the crossover, t is the current iteration index,
and M is the total iteration. Based on extensive experiments, it is beneficial for k to
decrease linearly from half to 10% of the total number of genes (O) because, in some early
iterations, individuals cannot determine which chromosomes are helpful. However, later
on, individuals in the exploitative population identified that they contained chromosomes
that carried much information, so fewer genes needed to be exchanged.
The number of individuals in the population increases after new individuals are
created through the GA. Assuming that the WOA population is N and the GA population
is G, the new population is a combined (N + G) population, leading to a population boom
after some iterations. To avoid a population explosion, which leads to high computational
costs, a conditional choice strategy, inspired by the Altruism strategy [44], is proposed to
sacrifice individuals in the new population with the number of sacrificed whales equal
to G. Therefore, the similarity index (SI), which is described in Equation (15), is used to
calculate the similarity score of each whale with their counterparts in the population.
SI =
1
HD(⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2) +
Fitt
1 −Fitt
2
 + ξ1
,
(15)
where⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2 are candidate individuals and Fitt
1, Fitt
2 are their fitness values. HD represents
the Hamming distance between⃗Xt
1 and⃗Xt
2. The Hamming distance, denoted by (⃗Xt
1,⃗Xt
2),
quantifies the disparity between two binary-encoded candidate solutions by counting
the points of variation. A minimal value ξ1 is added to the denominator to prevent
errors in scenarios where the denominator becomes zero. After calculating, one of the
two individuals in pairs with the highest SI will be removed randomly. The number of
individuals removed is equal to G to ensure the consistency of the algorithm, which is a
final population size of N after each iteration.
A flowchart of the GSWO is illustrated in Figure 4. The pseudocode for the proposed
method is presented in Algorithm 1.
