Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
15 of 26
•
r ∈range[0, 10] is illustrated by 8 bits.
•
b ∈range[0, 10] is illustrated by 8 bits
As a result, the form of a candidate whale in the input population is illustrated in
Figure 7. Through comprehensive experiments for fine-tuning hyperparameters of the
CatBoost model, the total iteration (M), the number of crossovers (G), the number of
whales in the population (N) are set as 40, 20, and 30, respectively. In addition, an initial
population of 30 whales can be depicted in Figure 8. Note that an initial population is
initialized randomly.
Figure 7. An example of a candidate whale for hyperparameter optimization.
Figure 8. An example of an input whale population for hyperparameter optimization.
The fitness function for hyperparameter optimization was different from that for FS.
To optimize hyperparameters to enhance the accuracy and inference speed, minimizing the
error of the classification model, iterations, and depth is necessary. Therefore, the fitness
function for hyperparameter optimization, which is the weighted sum of the errors of
the classification model, iterations, and depth, is defined by Equation (20). Therefore,
the optimization goal involves minimizing the fitness function.
Fiti = γ × err(⃗Xt
i) + 1 −γ
2
× iter + 1 −γ
2
× d,
(20)
where the value of the weight γ is set as 0.9 through comprehensive experiments in this
study; err(⃗Xt
i) is the false prediction rate of the CatBoost model, which is gained from
training and evaluating it on a specific dataset with the hyperparameters established in the
candidate whale⃗Xt
i.
Finally, Algorithm 1 is applied to run the GSWO algorithm 30 rounds. As a result,
a candidate whale with the lowest fitness value, corresponding to the most effective
hyperparameters for the CatBoost model to process a specific dataset, is determined.
Figure 9 illustrates that the first whale, which has the lowest fitness value, is chosen as the
output of GSWO for hyperparameter optimization.
Figure 9. An example of a result of GSWO for hyperparameter optimization.
