Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
12 of 26
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code for the GSWO
Initialize randomly the population of GSWO
Initialize the parameters a,⃗A,⃗C
Calculate the fitness values of all individuals
Determine the presently optimal solution X∗
while t ≤M do
Compute v using Equation (11)
Determine the Exploitative, Exploratory, and Hesitant subpopulation using Equation (12)
Duplicate Exploitative and Exploratory subpopulation
for each member in exploitative sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (13)
end
for each member in exploratory sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (8)
end
for each member in hesitant sub-population do
The position is updated using Equation (1)
end
Determine the number of crossovers G
Select G parents 1st from the exploitative subpopulation
Select G parents 2nd from the exploratory subpopulation
Calculate the changing genes k using Equation (14)
for from 0 to G do
Implement a crossover operator with k
Implement mutation
end
Examine the boundaries and compute the fitness values for all individuals.
Then, X∗is updated by sorting all individuals
Implementation of the conditional choice scheme
t = t + 1
end
return the X∗
4.3. CatBoost Classification Model
This study employed CatBoost as a WSN data classifier and attack detector. Based on
decision-tree techniques, CatBoost is a fast, high-performance gradient-boosting system.
CatBoost creates balanced trees with a symmetric structure, which sets it apart from other
gradient-boosting algorithms such as XGBoost and LightGBM. This implies that all the
nodes in a level are subjected to the same feature-split pair that yields the lowest loss
in each phase. Among the many benefits of this balanced design is its ability to build
CPUs efficiently, shorten prediction times, apply models quickly, and function as a type of
regularization to avoid overfitting.
CatBoost accommodates diverse data types, including numeric, categorical, and tex-
tual data. Categorical attributes, which are inherently noncomparable and pose a challenge
to the direct utilization of binary trees. In contrast to prevalent gradient boosting-based
methodologies such as one-hot encoding (OHE), gradient statistics (GS), target statistics
(TS), greedy TS, holdout TS, and leave-one-out TS, CatBoost employs an advanced or-
dered TS approach. This strategy mitigates the issues related to target leakage, diminishes
overfitting, and enables using a complete dataset for training purposes [39,45].
In CatBoost, the initial definition of hyperparameters is imperative for optimizing
predictive accuracy. Specifically, determining parameters such as the number of trees is sig-
nificant because it directly affects the potential for encountering overfitting or underfitting
challenges. The parameter d (maximum depth) reflects the learning capacity inherent in the
base tree; a higher value augments the learning process of the individual base tree, whereas
a lower value diminishes it. The learning rate parameter governs the velocity at which
