Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
10 of 26
Therefore, the searching for prey technique, which includes Equations (7) and (8), is suitable
to execute the recalibration of this subpopulation’s location.
In contrast, individuals with lower fitness values, which fall into the exploitative
subpopulation, need to increase inspection of the surrounding region to accelerate con-
vergence [43]. Therefore, both the encircling prey technique and the bubble-net attack
technique can be utilized randomly to modify the location of this subpopulation. For a
complete description of the specifics, see Equation (13), where the probability rate ρ2 is a
random value between the interval [0,1]. The⃗Dt and⃗D
′t are given in Equations (5) and (10),
respectively.
(⃗
Xt+1 =⃗Xt∗−⃗At ·⃗Dt
(ρ2 > 0.5).⃗
Xt+1 =⃗D
′t · ebl · cos(2πl) +⃗Xt∗
(ρ2 ≤0.5).
(13)
The hesitant subpopulation includes the remaining individuals with fitness values
between good and poor. These individuals employ a balanced strategy that incorporates
the whole process of traditional WOA and ensures a blend of exploration and exploitation.
This strategy is represented mathematically by Equation (1).
In GSWO, we re-evaluated all individuals in line with their current fitness levels
after each iteration. Consequently, the makeup of the individuals in each subpopulation
varies constantly with each iteration. Figure 4 shows a schematic diagram of GSWO
with the three-population division strategy. Unlike the traditional WOA, in the block
“Sorting the whale population”, Equation (12) is employed to divide the whole population
into three subpopulations based on the fitness value. Approximately one-third of the
individuals (exploratory subpopulation or the blue part) engage in global exploration,
including Equations (7) and (8). Another third (exploitative subpopulation or the orange
part) engages in local exploitation, including Equation (13), and the other third (hesitant
subpopulations or the green part) inherits all traditional WOA traits, including Equation (1).
Additionally, the exploratory and exploitative subpopulations implement genetic operators
(the branch on the left side) in the next paragraph. After that, four branches are concatenated
before calculating the fitness value and conducting the proposed conditional inherited
choice. During iterative procedures, this architecture gives GSWO the flexibility to conduct
both global and local explorations.
Figure 4. Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization Algorithm.
However, if only this three-population structure were used, its tendency would still be
more towards exploitation than exploration for two reasons. Firstly, individuals gravitate
toward random peers during the exploration phase, limiting their ability to increase explo-
ration and expand their search field. Secondly, the WOA algorithm has two exploitation
