Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
14 of 26
feature subset, represented by the second whale, consists of features of order [0, 5, 6, 8, 9,
13, 14, 15, 17].
Figure 6. An example of a result of GSWO for FS.
4.5. Applying GSWO for Hyperparameter Optimization
This study developed an ensemble-learning approach based on CatBoost to identify
intrusive behaviors in WSNs. The optimization of CatBoost hyperparameters poses a
challenge, promoting the proposal of GSWO and quantization [47] are introduced as
solutions. The hyperparameters considered in this study include learning rate (α), depth (d),
iteration (iter), L2 regularization term (l2), bagging_temperature (b), and random_strength
(r). The roles of these parameters in CatBoost’s performance are as follows:
CatBoost typically employs 1000 trees by default. Consequently, a higher number of
iterations leads to increased training and inference times, while excessively few iterations
may yield subpar results. Striking an optimal balance in the number of iterations is crucial
for maintaining speed and accuracy. Simultaneously, adjusting the learning rate became
necessary as the number of iterations decreased, emphasizing the importance of selecting
an appropriate learning rate for optimal model performance. Although CatBoost’s default
learning rate is often close to optimal, it can be finetuned to achieve the best-suited values.
Similarly, hyperparameters such as depth, random strength, bagging temperature, and L2
regularization terms require optimization to identify the tradeoff that maximizes accuracy.
To apply GSWO for hyperparameter optimization, the form of each whale in the input
population must be a binary array. However, the types of these hyperparameters, integer or
float, are unsuitable for the input of our proposed method GSWO and do not optimize the
computing resources regarding speed and accuracy. Therefore, we proposed quantization
to convert these hyperparameters into a binary array before feed-forwarding to GSWO.
The quantization included three steps:
Step 1: Calculate the range of values within the specified range using Equation (17).
value_range = max_value −min_value.
(17)
Step 2: Calculate the step size for each bit using Equation (18), where num_bits is the
total number of bits used for representation.
step_size = value_range
2num_bits
.
(18)
Step 3: Quantize the number using Equation (19) and convert it to a binary array.
quantized_value = round
number −min_value
step_size

,
(19)
where the number is the value to be quantized.
Each hyperparameter is represented by the number of bits appropriate to its allowable
value range. In this study, through extensive experiments, the specific range of each
hyperparameter and the number of bits is set as follows:
•
α ∈range[0.001, 0.5] is illustrated by 14 bits.
•
d ∈range[2, 9] is illustrated by 3 bits.
•
iter ∈range[50, 690] is illustrated by 6 bits.
•
l2 ∈range[2, 9] is illustrated by 3 bits.
