Sensors 2024, 24, 3339
9 of 26
produced possess the traits of both parents. Compared to the parents’ chromosomes,
the child’s unique combination may provide better or worse outcomes.
Figure 2. Crossover operator.
The purpose of the mutation operation is to avoid the problem of being trapped in
local optima [42]. This process facilitated the generation of new individuals by modifying
their random characteristics. Binary values are randomly reversed to convert 1s into 0s
and vice versa in order to carry it out. For example, as graphically shown in Figure 3,
the introduction of a mutation point at the individual’s third, sixth, and eighth positions
cause the chromosome to mutate. The bold shows selected genes for mutation and the red
color illustrates the new value of genes after mutation.
Figure 3. Mutation operator.
4.2. Proposed Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization
The GSWO proposed in this study was used to address global optimization and
engineering design challenges. Based on fitness value, the whale population was divided
into three subpopulations, each with a different number of individuals based on fitness
values, as shown in Equations (11) and (12).
v = Fitmax −Fitmin,
(11)
where Fitmax is the highest fitness value, while Fitmin is the lowest fitness value in the
population at a specific iteration. v is the distance between the best individual and the
poorest individual.





Fit > Fitmax −1
3 ∗v : Explore.
Fit < Fitmin + 1
3 ∗v : Exploit.
The remaining is hesitant subpopulation.
(12)
A corresponding calculation formula exists for the fitness value depending on the
application. In this study, the fitness value is the false prediction rate of the model classifi-
cation, so the smallest fitness value is the best.
The exploratory subpopulation includes whales with higher fitness values that are far
from the current optimal solution. They are expected to strengthen the global exploration
capabilities of the algorithm, allowing a systematic examination of more search spaces.
