Electronics 2026, 15, 938
7 of 20
3.3.2. Mutual Information and Correlation-Based Feature Selection
Variance filtering relies solely on the statistical distribution characteristics of the
network data, without considering the relationship between features and labels. To address
this issue, mutual information and Pearson Correlation Coefficients are used to measure
the relationship between them. Mutual information, a fundamental concept in information
theory, is employed to quantify the dependency between two variables. It measures the
information that one variable conveys about the other. When knowledge of one variable
enables accurate prediction of the other, the mutual information between them is considered
high [27]. Assume thaty denotes the corresponding class label in the dataset. According to
Ref. [28], the mutual information between the class label and a feature can be expressed as:
MI(y, fi) = H(y) + H(fi) −H(y, fi)
(3)
where H(y) and H(fi) denote the information entropies of the y and fi, respectively,
and H(y, fi) represents their joint entropy. As shown in Formula (3), a higher mutual
information value suggests that a feature preserves more label-related information and
thus contributes more effectively to classification performance.
3.3.3. mRMR-Based Feature Selection
The correlation between selected feature subsets can easily introduce feature redun-
dancy, thus affecting the classification performance of intrusion detection models. In-
fluenced by the Minimum Redundancy Maximum Relevance (mRMR) model, Ambu-
saidi et al. [29] used the Pearson Correlation Coefficient between features and labels to
measure the redundancy between features and labels. The expression can be expressed
as follows:
JmRMR(fi) = argmax
fi

MI(y, fi) −1
|S| ∑
fs∈|S|
corr(fi,fs)
corr(y, fi)


(4)
where corr(y, fi) denotes the Pearson Correlation Coefficient betweeny and fi. It is defined
as follows:
corr(y, fi) =
u
∑
t=1
(yt −y)(fit −fi)
s
u
∑
t=1
(yt −y)2(fit −fi)
2
(5)
3.3.4. Hybrid Feature Selection Method
Correlations among features and labels can provide additional information to guide the
selection of the features. Consequently, in this article, the Pearson Correlation Coefficient
is also employed to evaluate the correlations of features and labels. The overall objective
function of the proposed feature selection method is formulated as:
J(fi) = argmax
fi

MI(y, fi) + corr(y, fi) −1
|S| ∑
fs∈|S|
corr(fi, fs)
corr(y, fi)


(6)
where S denotes the already selected feature subset, and fi represents a candidate feature.
Based on the above analysis, the hybrid feature selection algorithm proposed in this paper
is presented in Algorithm 1.
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15050938
