Academic Editor: Marina Prvan
Received: 27 January 2026
Revised: 12 February 2026
Accepted: 16 February 2026
Published: 25 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
A Lightweight Multi-Classification Intrusion Detection Model
for Edge IoT Networks
Wei Gao 1,2
, Mingyue Wang 1,2, Yadong Pei 1,2
, Fangwei Li 3 and Chaonan Wang 1,2,*
1
Key Laboratory of Public Big Data Security Technology, Chongqing College of Mobile Communication,
Chongqing 401420, China; gaowei@cqytxy.edu.cn (W.G.)
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Public Big Data Security Technology, Chongqing 401420, China
3
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
*
Correspondence: wangchaonan@cqytxy.edu.cn
Abstract
Intrusion detection aims to effectively detect abnormal attacks in Internet of Things (IoT)
networks, which is crucial for cybersecurity. However, it is difficult for traditional in-
trusion detection methods to effectively extract data features from traffic data, and most
existing models are too complex to be deployed on edge servers. Addressing this need,
this paper proposes a hybrid feature selection method and a lightweight deep learning
intrusion detection model. Firstly, the data feature space is reduced using variance filter-
ing, mutual information, and the Pearson Correlation Coefficient, thereby reducing the
computational cost of subsequent model training. Then, an intrusion detection model
based on a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) is constructed. This model utilizes
dilated causal convolutions to effectively capture long-term temporal dependencies in
network traffic. Simultaneously, the residual connections are used to mitigate the vanishing
gradient problem, making the model easier to train and converge. Finally, experiments
are conducted on the newly released Edge-IIoTset dataset. The results show that the
proposed feature selection algorithm maintains good detection performance despite a
significant reduction in feature dimensionality. Furthermore, compared with other models,
the proposed TCN-based approach achieves higher classification accuracy with lower com-
putational overhead, demonstrating its suitability for deployment in resource-constrained
edge computing environments.
Keywords: IoT security; intrusion detection; feature reduction; temporal convolution
networks; mutual information; Pearson Correlation Coefficient
1. Introduction
With the continuous advancement of information technology, the Internet of Things
(IoT) has gradually integrated into all aspects of society and has shown extensive appli-
cation value in many fields, such as industrial IoT [1], healthcare [2], smart cities [3], and
smart homes [4]. However, due to the characteristics of IoT devices, including simplified
hardware design, limited computing and storage resources, diverse network protocols, and
decentralized geographical deployment, IoT devices are extremely vulnerable to network
attacks in practical applications, causing serious network security incidents such as network
system paralysis and user privacy leaks [5,6]. Therefore, how to effectively ensure the
security and stable operation of IoT systems has become an important issue that urgently
needs to be addressed.
Electronics 2026, 15, 938
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15050938
