Electronics 2026, 15, 938
8 of 20
Algorithm 1 Hybrid Feature Selection Algorithm
Input: Feature set F =

f1, . . . fp
	
, class labels y, Number of feature subsets: K
Output: The feature subset F′
Step1. Initialization: set F′ = ∅
Step2. The variance filtering method is used to initially screen the original dataset,
resulting in a new dataset FV =
n
f1, f2, . . . fp′
o
Step3. Calculate MI(y, fi) for each feature in dataset FV
Step4. Select the feature fi with the highest mutual information
Step5. Set F ←F\fi , F′ ←F′∪fi ,
Step6. While |F′| < K do
Calculate J(fi) in (6) to find fi, F ←F\fi , F′ ←F′∪fi
End For
Step7. Return F′
3.4. Intrusion Detection Framework Based on TCN
The TCN is constructed by stacking multiple residual blocks, with each residual block
using a fixed kernel size k and an exponentially increasing dilation factor d. Within each
residual block, causal convolution ensures temporal causality, dilated convolution expands
the receptive field, and residual connections facilitate model training and convergence.
Utilizing the temporal characteristics of network traffic in IoT systems, this paper constructs
an intrusion detection model based on TCN. The model diagram is shown in Figure 3.
Dilated Causal ConV
(kernel =2.kernel size=2)
Batch Normalization
PReLU
Dropout
      Conv
(Optional)
Residual Block ( , )
k d
Residual Block ( ,
1)
k d =
Residual Block ( ,
2)
k d =
Residual Block( ,
4)
k d =
Residual Block ( ,
8)
k d =
1
1
×
 
Figure 3. TCN model diagram.
3.4.1. Causal Convolution
Causal convolution restricts the sliding direction of the convolution kernel in the time
dimension, ensuring that the output at each time step depends only on the current time
step and the previous inputs. Therefore, using causal convolution, the intrusion detection
output at time t is only convolved with the time series at time t or earlier, without losing
historical data, and can preserve data traffic information over a longer period of time.
3.4.2. Dilated Convolution
Dilated convolutional layers introduce a dilation factor within the convolutional filter,
thereby enabling the model to have a larger receptive field. Unlike sequential models, each
output position in a dilated convolution depends only on the kernel size and the dilation
factor. Therefore, multiple outputs can be computed simultaneously, enabling parallel
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15050938
