Electronics 2026, 15, 938
17 of 20
Considering these findings, future work will focus on investigating the impact of few
samples on feature extraction and the detection performance of the TCN model. Adap-
tive feature selection strategies or attention-weighted mechanisms can be explored to
enhance the contribution of minority samples during training. In addition, edge deploy-
ment schemes can be further optimized and combined with federated learning to reduce
feature selection and model training costs. To validate the practical feasibility of such
optimization strategies, the model’s resource consumption and real-time performance on
real IoT hardware deserve further evaluation.
6. Conclusions
This paper addresses the challenges of high dimensionality and severe feature redun-
dancy in network traffic data within the IoT environment, as well as the high computational
complexity and difficulty in deploying existing intrusion detection models in edge devices.
A hybrid feature selection method combined with a lightweight deep learning intrusion
detection model is proposed. In the hybrid feature selection stage, variance filtering, mutual
information, and Pearson Correlation Coefficient are integrated to effectively reduce feature
dimensionality and redundancy, providing a subset of features with strong discrimina-
tive power and low feature dimensionality for subsequent model training. Experimental
results show that even when the feature dimension is compressed from 94 to 18, the pro-
posed feature selection method still exhibits good detection performance. Based on this, a
lightweight intrusion detection model based on TCN is constructed and validated on the
Edge-IIoTset dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that the TCN model has significant
advantages in detection performance, providing a new approach for deploying intrusion
detection system at the edge. In future work, we will investigate the impact of data imbal-
ance to feature selection and TCN model, thereby further enhancing the applicability and
robustness of the model for anomalous IoT traffic prediction.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.G. and M.W.; methodology, W.G. and F.L.; software,
W.G. and Y.P.; validation, Y.P., C.W. and W.G.; formal analysis, W.G.; investigation, M.W.; resources,
C.W.; data curation, C.W.; writing—original draft preparation, W.G.; writing—review and editing,
C.W. and M.W.; visualization, Y.P.; supervision, F.L.; project administration, F.L.; funding acquisition,
M.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Major Project of Science and Technology Research Program
of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission of China (Grant number KJZD-K202302401), the
Youth Project of Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing Education Commission of
China (Grant number KJQN202302402), and the Applied Research Project of Chongqing College of
Mobile Communication (Grant number KY20240007).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Chongqing Key Laboratory of Public Big Data
Security Technology.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics15050938
