M. S. Alshehri et al.: Self-Attention-Based DCNN for IIoT Networks Intrusion Detection
II. RELATED WORK
The rapid expansion of the IIoT in industrial sectors
brings numerous benefits but also exposes vulnerabilities to
malicious attackers. Many researchers and experts have been
diligently working on improving security and have proposed
various methods for identifying malicious attacks within
these networks.
Authors in [25] present a DCNN model designed for
IoT network monitoring and the identification of malicious
activities. The DCNN model was applied to both category
and sub-category scenarios to discern the sub-class of attacks.
To evaluate the model’s performance, the authors utilized the
IoTID20 dataset. From the experiments, they achieved an
accuracy of 77.55% in detecting malicious activities.
In [26], the authors proposed a hybrid model combining
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) for detecting intrusions in IoT network
scenarios. The primary emphasis of the authors is on enhanc-
ing the model’s performance, specifically concentrating on
identifying sub-categories of IoT network attacks. They
employed the Edge-IIoTset dataset to assess the performance
of the CNN-LSTM model. The results showcase a remarkable
98.69% accuracy in classifying attacks.
In [27], the authors introduced an Extreme Learning
Machine, Support Vector Machine models, and a rule-
based intrusion detection system similar to SNORT for IIoT
networks. The performance of the proposed model was
evaluated using the KDD99, UNSW-NB15, CSE-CIC-IDS-
2018, and Edge-IIoTset datasets. They achieved accuracy
rates of 97.83%, 96.59%, 92.54%, and 97.27% for the
respective datasets.
In [28], the authors employed the LSTM model for
monitoring Software-Defined Networking (SDN)-enabled
IoT networks and detecting cyberattacks. The authors
specifically concentrated on enhancing the accuracy of Low-
Rate Distributed Denial of Service (LDDoS) detection. They
utilized the Edge-IIoTset dataset to evaluate the models. The
results presented in the paper demonstrate an impressive
98.88% accuracy in the classification of multi-class sub-
category classifications.
In [29], the authors introduced a hybrid model that
combines a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (B-GRU) and
LSTM for identifying cyber attacks in edge-envisioned smart
agriculture networks. The authors focused specifically on
enhancing the detection of DDoS attacks in these networks.
They assessed the model using the Edge-IIoTset dataset, and
the experimental outcomes revealed an impressive 98.32%
accuracy.
The related studies predominantly concentrate on improv-
ing the performance of intrusion detection in IoT and IIoT
networks. However, a common limitation in these studies is
the oversight of data-cleaning procedures before the training
phase. Specifically, there is a lack of attention to addressing
redundancies within the data belonging to the same class
(intra-class) and neglecting the inclusion of mixed data across
different classes (inter-class). Some network datasets used in
FIGURE 2. Basic architecture of SA-DCNN.
these studies exhibit repetitive data patterns, which can result
in inflated model performance on those particular datasets.
This is because the model may encounter much of the test set
data during the training phase, leading to an overestimation
of its effectiveness. Furthermore, ML and DL models tend to
experience a decline in performance when confronted with
datasets containing repetitions of similar data across various
classes, even if only the class labels differ.
III. THE PROPOSED SA-DCNN MODEL
This study proposes a novel DL model called SA-DCNN
for IIoT network traffic monitoring and detection of cyber-
attacks. The SA-DCNN consists of a self-attention mech-
anism and deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN),
as depicted in Fig 2. The self-attention mechanism computes
the significance value for each input feature, and the DCNN
processes these parameters to detect IIoT network behavior.
The primary advantage of DCNN is its ability to converge
inputs toward the most impactful parameters and reduce
the overall number of parameters. This process enhances
detection performance while minimizing time consumption.
In the proposed model, the self-attention mechanism is
used to compute attention scores and highlight the importance
of each input feature. This mechanism calculates the attention
score based on queries (Q), keys (k), and values (V). Q, K,
and V are computed using Eq 1, Eq 2, and Eq 3, respectively,
45764
VOLUME 12, 2024
