M. S. Alshehri et al.: Self-Attention-Based DCNN for IIoT Networks Intrusion Detection
TABLE 1. Performance assessment with various layers combination on IoTID20 category.
TABLE 2. Performance assessment with various layers combination on IoTID20 sub-category.
C. THE PROPOSED SA-DCNN HYPERPARAMETERS
In this experiment, we utilize various hyperparameters to
achieve optimal performance. In all convolutional layers,
64 filters, a kernel size of 3, the same padding, and the
ReLU activation function are utilized. The max pooling
layer employs a pool size of 2. In the feedforward neural
network layer, three layers are used. The first two layers
are hidden layers with 64 and 32 hidden units, respectively,
employing the ReLU activation function. The final layer of
the feedforward neural network is the output layer of the
model, where the softmax function is employed to produce
probabilities for multi-classification.
The sparse categorical cross-entropy function is employed
for loss calculation, and the Adam optimizer is utilized to
optimize weights during training. A batch size of 32, along
with a configured number of 100 epochs, has been selected
for the IoTID20 dataset, aiming to facilitate an efficient
and effective training process. For the EdgeIIoTset dataset,
a batch size of 32 and a configured number of 20 epochs have
been chosen to achieve optimal training performance.
V. EXPERIMENTATION AND FINDINGS
This section primarily focuses on the experimental findings.
Initially, it presents the evaluation metrics used in the
experiments. Following that, a brief overview of the exper-
imental system environment where all the experiments were
conducted is provided. Subsequently, a detailed presentation
of the outcomes of the proposed model is given, along
with a comparison with other models and state-of-the-art
articles. To assess the effectiveness of the proposed SA-
DCNN model, we employed four evaluation metrics, namely
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
A. IMPLEMENTATION ENVIRONMENT
Experiments were conducted on an HP desktop system
equipped with a core-i9 nine-generation CPU, a GEFORCE
RTX 2080 GPU, and 32 GB of RAM. The Python
3.11 programming language, along with Jupyter Notebook,
was employed for the implementation of classifiers. Various
libraries, such as Tensorflow, Pandas, sci-kit-learn, and
Numpy, were leveraged to support the implementation. It is
noteworthy that all these tools were run on a Windows 11 Pro
64-bit operating system to ensure consistency and compati-
bility.
B. THE PROPOSED SA-DCNN OUTCOMES
In this section, we present the experimental outcomes
of the proposed SA-DCNN with various hyperparameter
variations for two scenarios: multi-class category and multi-
class sub-category classifications, utilizing both datasets.
Furthermore, to assess the efficacy of the SA-DCNN model,
we conducted experiments with several other traditional ML
and DL models in the same environment and compared
the results with those of the proposed model. Additionally,
VOLUME 12, 2024
45767
