CIFAR-100
+12.5k GAN
+25k GAN
+37.5k GAN
+50k GAN
90
95
100
Train Agreement
GAN-Generated Data
D0
D0 ∪D1
D1
80
90
100
Train Agreement
Held-Out Data
Baseline
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter Combined Augs
60
80
100
Train Agreement
Data Augmentation
1 Teacher
3 Teachers
5 Teachers
Figure 5: The train agreement for teacher ensembles (m ∈{1, 3, 5}) and student on the distillation
data for a ResNet-56 on CIFAR-100 under different augmentation policies. In all panels, increasing
the softness of the teacher labels by adding examples not in the teacher train data makes distillation
more difﬁcult. Left: agreement for the synthetic GAN-augmentation policy from Figure 1. Middle:
agreement from subsampled CIFAR-100 experiment in Figure 4. Right: agreement for some of the
augmentation policies in Figure 3. The shaded region is not visible because the variance is very low.
6
Optimization: Does the Student Match the Teacher on Distillation Data?
If poor ﬁdelity is not primarily an identiﬁability problem from the wrong choice of distillation data,
perhaps there is a simpler explanation. Up to this point, we have focused on student ﬁdelity on a
held-out test set. Now we turn our attention to student behavior on the distillation data itself. Does
the student match the teacher on the data it is trained to match it on?
6.1
More distillation data lowers train agreement
In Figure 1 we presented an experiment distilling ResNet-56 networks on CIFAR-100 augmented with
synthetic GAN-generated images. We saw that enlarging the distillation dataset leads to improved
teacher-student agreement on test, but the agreement remains relatively low (below 80%) even for the
largest distillation dataset that we considered. In Figure 5 (left panel), we report the teacher-student
agreement for the same experiment, but now on the distillation dataset. We now observe the opposite
trend: as the distillation dataset becomes larger, it becomes more challenging for the student to match
the teacher. Even when the student has identical capacity to the teacher, the student only achieves
95% agreement with the teacher when we use 50k synthetic images for distillation.
The drop in train agreement is even more pronounced when we use extensive data augmentation. In
Figure 5, right panel, we report the teacher-student agreement on the train set with data augmentation
for a subset of augmentation strategies presented in Section 5.1. We use the CIFAR-100 dataset and
the ResNet-56 model for the teachers and the students (for details, see Section 5.1). In each case,
we measure agreement on the augmented training set that was used during distillation. While for
the baseline augmentation strategy, we can achieve almost perfect teacher-student agreement, for
heavier augmentations the agreement drops dramatically. For the Rotation, Vertical Flip and Color
Jitter augmentations, the agreement is between 80% and 90% for all the considered teacher sizes.
For Combined Augs, the combination of these three augmentation strategies, the agreement drops
even further, to just 60% in self-distillation!
Our intuition about how knowledge distillation should work largely hinges on the assumption that
after distillation the student matches the teacher on the distillation set. However, the results presented
in this section suggest that in practice the optimization method is unable to achieve high ﬁdelity even
on the distillation dataset when extensive data augmentation or synthetic data is used. The inability
to solve the optimization problem undermines distillation: in order to ﬁnd a student that would match
the teacher on all inputs, we need to at least be able to ﬁnd a student that would match the teacher on
all of the distillation data.
Optimization and the train-test ﬁdelity gap.
Notably, despite having the lowest train agreement,
the Combined Augs policy results in better test agreement than other polices with better train
agreement (Figure 3). This result highlights a fundamental trade-off in knowledge distillation: the
student needs many teacher labels match the teacher on test, but introducing examples not in the
teacher train data makes matching the teacher on the distillation data very difﬁcult.
8
