Baseline
Baseline(τ = 4)
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter
CombAug
MixUp
MixUp(τ = 4) GAN(τ = 4)
OOD
Noise
0.72
0.74
0.76
Accuracy
Baseline
Baseline(τ = 4)
Rotation
Vertical Flip
ColorJitter
CombAug
MixUp
MixUp(τ = 4) GAN(τ = 4)
OOD
Noise
0.75
0.80
0.85
Agreement
Figure 3: Data augmentation and distillation: Test accuracy and teacher-student agreement when
distilling a 5-component ResNet-56 teacher ensemble into a ResNet-56 student on CIFAR-100 with
varying augmentation policies. The best performing policy is shown in green, results averaged over 3
runs. Additional metrics are reported in Figure 11 in Appendix C. Mixup and GAN augmentation
provide the best generalization, and Mixup(τ = 4) provides the best ﬁdelity. The baseline policy
(crops and ﬂips) with τ = 4 is a surprisingly strong baseline. The error bars indicate ±σ.
gap in ﬁdelity, even after the distillation set is enlarged with 50k GAN samples. In practice, the
gap remains large enough that higher ﬁdelity students do not always have better generalization, and
the regularization effects we see in self-distillation do play a role for more broadly understanding
student generalization. We will indeed show in Section 5 that higher ﬁdelity students do not always
generalize better, even if the teacher generalizes much better than the student.
4.3
If distillation already improves generalization, why care about ﬁdelity?
While knowledge distillation does often improve generalization, understanding the relationship
between ﬁdelity and generalization, and how to maximize ﬁdelity, is important for several reasons —
including better generalization!
Better generalization in distilling large teacher models and ensembles.
Knowledge distillation
was initially motivated as a means to deploy powerful models to small devices or low-latency
controllers [e.g., 10, 19, 24, 46, 48]. While in self-distillation generalization and ﬁdelity are in
tension, there is often a signiﬁcant disparity in generalization between large teacher models, including
ensembles, and smaller students. We have seen this disparity in Figure 1(b). We additionally show in
Figure 10 in Appendix B.1 that as we increase the number of ensemble components, the generalization
disparity between teacher and distilled student increases. Improving student ﬁdelity is the most
obvious way to close the generalization disparity between student and teacher in these settings. Even
if one exclusively cares about student accuracy, ﬁdelity is a key consideration outside self-distillation.
Interpretability and reliability.
Knowledge distillation has been identiﬁed as a means to transfer
representations discovered by large black-box models into simpler more interpretable models, for
example to provide insights into medical diagnostics, or discovering rules for understanding sentiment
in text [e.g., 21, 22, 6, 30, 8]. The ability to perform this transfer could have extraordinary scientiﬁc
consequences: large models can often discover structure in data that we would not have anticipated
a priori. Moreover, we often want to transfer properties such as well-calibrated uncertainties or
robustness, which have been well-established for larger models, so that we can safely deploy more
efﬁcient models in their place. In both cases, achieving good distillation ﬁdelity is crucial.
Understanding.
The name knowledge distillation implies we are transferring knowledge from
the teacher to the student. For this reason, improved student generalization as a consequence of a
distillation procedure is sometimes conﬂated with ﬁdelity. Decoupling ﬁdelity and generalization,
and explicitly studying ﬁdelity, is foundational to understanding how knowledge distillation works
and how we can make it more useful across a variety of applications.
4.4
Possible causes of low distillation ﬁdelity
If we are able to match the student model to the teacher on a comprehensive distillation dataset, we
expect it to match on the test data as well, achieving high distillation ﬁdelity3. Possible causes of the
poor distillation ﬁdelity in our CIFAR-100 experiments include:
3See, for example, Lemma 1 in Fakoor et al. [12].
5
