A
Implementation details
Here we brieﬂy describe key implementation details to reproduce our experiments. Data augmentation
details are given in A.1, followed by architecture details in A.2, and ﬁnally training details are provided
in A.3. The reader is encouraged to consult the included code for closer inspection.
A.1
Data augmentation procedures
Some of the data augmentation procedures we consider attempt to generate data that is close to the
train data distribution (standard augmentations, GAN, mixup). Others (random noise, out-of-domain
data) produce data for distillation that the teacher would never encounter during normal supervised
training. In particular, we compare the following augmentation procedures:
Baseline augmentations
As a baseline, we use the same data augmentation strategy that was used
to train the teachers during distillation: we apply random horizontal ﬂips (p = 0.5) and random shifts
via pad and random-crop with a 4 pixel pad width. In all of the conﬁgurations we consider in this
section we use this set of augmentations along with other strategies, unless stated otherwise.
Conventional image transformations
Standard data augmentations used in computer vision [32]:
random rotations by up to 20 degrees, random vertical ﬂips, color jitter and all possible combinations.
Mixup
Mixup is an effective regularization technique originally proposed to increase generalization
and robustness of deep networks [50, 44]. Instead of training on original dataset, the network is
trained on convex combination of images with targets mixed in the same way. We adapt mixup to
knowledge distillation as follows: on each iteration we construct random pairs of inputs x, x′ from
the training set and mix them as λ · x + (1 −λ) · x′, where the coefﬁcient λ is sampled uniformly on
[0, 1]5.
Synthetic GAN-generated images
We use a Spectral Normalization GAN (SN-GAN) trained on
CIFAR-100 [35] to generate synthetic data for distillation. We used the same pretrained SN-GAN
(FID = 74.2617, IS = 6.6023) for all experiments. Our synthetic augmentation procedure was the
following: for each minibatch of real training data, we concatenated synthetic images sampled from a
pretrained SN-GAN at a ratio of 1 synthetic image to 4 real images.
Random noise
To observe the effect of unnatural images in the distillation dataset we augment
with images sampled pixel-wise from uniform [0, 1]d. During distillation each image in a minibatch
is randomly resampled with probability p = 0.2.
Out-of-domain data
Finally, we consider using images from the SVHN dataset [37] which is
semantically unrelated to the target CIFAR-100 dataset.
We use the torchvision.transoforms package [39] to implement the augmentations from the
Baseline Augmentations and Conventional Image Transformations categories:
• Horizontal ﬂips: torchvision.transforms.RandomHorizontalFlip()
• Random
shifts:
torchvision.transforms.RandomCrop(size=<input_size>,
padding=4)
• Vertical ﬂips: torchvision.transforms.RandomVerticalFlip()
• Color
jitter:
torchvision.transforms.ColorJitter(brightness=0.2,
contrast=0.2, saturation=0.2, hue=0.2)
• Random rotations: torchvision.transforms.RandomRotation(degrees=20)
A.2
Network architectures
Image classiﬁers
For experiments on CIFAR-100 we used preactivation ResNets with batchnorm,
skip connections [18], and the standard three-stage macro-structure, varying the number of layers
in each stage (i.e. the depth of the network). For all choices of depth we used the same number
of ﬁlters in each stage (16, 32, and 64, respectively). In Section C.2 we use a VGG-16 network
5Note that unlike in the original mixup procedure we are only mixing the inputs and we use the predictions
of the teacher on the mixed inputs as the target for the student.
14
