By comparing the ﬁdelity of (t, s) and (t, s′) we can distinguish between a generic improvement in
generalization and an improvement speciﬁcally to ﬁdelity. If s and s′ have comparable ﬁdelity, then
the students agree with the teacher at many points because they generalize well, and not the reverse.
4
Knowledge Distillation Transfers Knowledge Poorly
In this section, we present evidence that we are not able to distill large networks such as a ResNet-56
with high ﬁdelity, and discuss why high ﬁdelity is an important objective.
4.1
When is knowledge transfer successful?
We ﬁrst consider the easy task of distilling a LeNet-5 teacher into an identical student network as
a motivating example. We train the teacher on a random subset of 200 examples from the MNIST
training set for 100 epochs, resulting in a 84% to 86% teacher test accuracy across different subsets.2
We then distill the teacher using the full MNIST train dataset with 60,000 examples, as well as 25%,
50%, and 100% of the EMNIST train dataset [11]. The EMNIST train set contains 697,932 images.
In Figure 2 we see that knowledge distillation works as expected. With enough examples the student
learns to make the same predictions as the teacher (over 99% top-1 test agreement). Notably, in this
case, self-distillation does not improve generalization, since the slight difference between the teacher
and student accuracy is explained by variance between trials.
MNIST 60k
EMNIST 175k
EMNIST 350k
EMNIST 700k
80
85
90
95
100
Test Agreement
80
85
90
95
100
Test Accuracy
Student Accuracy
Teacher Accuracy
Agreement
Figure 2: LeNet-5 self-distillation on
MNIST with additional distillation data.
The shaded region corresponds to µ ± σ,
estimated over 3 trials.
Now we consider a more challenging task: distilling a
ResNet-56 teacher trained on CIFAR-100 into an identical
student network (Figure 1, left). Since no dataset drawn
from the same distribution as CIFAR-100 is publicly avail-
able, to augment the distillation data, we instead combined
samples from an SN-GAN [35] pre-trained on CIFAR-100
with the original CIFAR-100 train dataset. Appendix A.3
details the hyperparameters and training procedure for the
GAN, teacher, and student.
Like the MNIST experiment, as we enlarge the distillation
dataset the student ﬁdelity improves. However, in this
case the improvement is modest, with the ﬁdelity reaching
nowhere near 99% test agreement. Since a ResNet-56 has
many more parameters than a LeNet-5, it is possible that
the student simply has not seen enough examples to per-
fectly emulate the teacher, a hypothesis we discuss in more
detail in Section 5.1. Also, like the MNIST experiment,
as the distillation dataset grows the student accuracy ap-
proaches the teacher’s. Unlike the MNIST experiment, the
student test accuracy is higher than the teacher’s when the distillation dataset is small, so increasing
ﬁdelity decreases student generalization.
4.2
What can self-distillation tell us about knowledge distillation in general?
We have seen in Figure 1(a) that with self-distillation the student can exceed the teacher performance,
in accordance with Furlanello et al. [13]. This result is only possible by virtue of failing at the
distillation procedure: if the student matched the teacher perfectly then the student could not
outperform the teacher. On the other hand, if the teacher generalizes signiﬁcantly better than an
independently trained student, we would expect the beneﬁts of ﬁdelity to dominate other regularization
effects associated with not matching the teacher. This setting reﬂects the original motivation for
knowledge distillation, where we wish to faithfully transfer the representation discovered by a large
model or ensemble of models into a more efﬁcient student.
In Figure 1(b) we see that if we move from self-distillation to the distillation of a 3 ResNet-56 teacher
ensemble, ﬁdelity becomes positively correlated with generalization. But there is still a signiﬁcant
2We took only a subset of the MNIST train set since otherwise every teacher network as well as the ensemble
would achieve over 99% test accuracy.
4
