We report the student accuracy and teacher-student agreement for each augmentation strategy, and
also include results for Baseline with τ = 1 and τ = 4 to demonstrate the effect of logit tempering.
We ﬁrst observe that the best augmentation policies for generalization, MixUp, and GAN4, are not
the best policies for ﬁdelity. Furthermore, although many augmentation strategies enable slightly
higher distillation ﬁdelity compared to Baseline (τ = 1), even the best augmentation policy, Mixup
(τ = 4), only achieves a modest 86% test agreement. In fact the Baseline (τ = 4) policy is quite
competitive, achieving 84.5% test agreement. Many of the augmentation strategies also slightly
improve teacher-student KL relative to Baseline (τ = 4) (see Figure 11).
In Figure 11 in Appendix B.3 we report all generalization and ﬁdelity metrics for a range of ensemble
sizes, as well as the results for the independent student baseline discussed in Section 3.2. Often these
independent students, taught how to mimic a completely different model, have nearly as good test
agreement with the teacher as the student explicitly trained to emulate it. See Appendix A.1 for a
detailed description of the augmentation procedures.
Should data augmentation be close to the data distribution?
In theory, any data augmentation
should help with identiﬁability: if a student matches a teacher on more data, it is more likely to match
the teacher elsewhere. However, the Noise and OOD augmentation strategies based on noise and out-
of-distribution data fail on all metrics, decreasing performance compared to the baseline. In practice,
data augmentation has an effect beyond improving identiﬁability — it has a regularizing effect,
making optimization more challenging. We explore this facet of data augmentation in Section 6.
The slight improvements to ﬁdelity with extensive augmentations suggest that increasing the support
of the distillation dataset can indeed improve distillation ﬁdelity. However, since the beneﬁt is so
small compared to heuristics like logit tempering (which does not modify the support at all), it is very
unlikely that an insufﬁcient quantity of teacher labels is the primary obstacle to high ﬁdelity.
5.2
The data recycling hypothesis
If simply showing the student more labels does not always signiﬁcantly improve ﬁdelity, perhaps we
are not showing the student the right labels. Additional data augmentation during distillation does
give the student more teacher labels to match, but also introduces a distribution shift between the
images the teacher was trained on and the images the student is distilling on. Even when the teacher
and student have the same augmentation policy, reusing the teacher’s training data for distillation
violates the assumptions of empirical risk minimization (ERM) because the distillation data is not an
independent draw from the true joint distribution over images and teacher labels. What if there was
no augmentation distribution shift, and the student was distilled on a fresh draw from the joint test
distribution over images and teacher labels?
To investigate the effect of recycling teacher data during distillation we randomly split the CIFAR-100
training dataset D into two equal parts, D0 and D1. We train teacher ResNet-56 ensembles on D0,
and then compare s0, a student distilled on the original D0, s1, a student distilled on the unseen D1,
and s0∪1, a student distilled on both: D0 ∪D1. Note that the students cannot access the true labels,
only those provided by the teacher. We present the results in Figure 4, varying the ensemble size in
the top row and the logit temperature in the bottom row.
Surprisingly, s0 attains higher test accuracy than s1, while showing worse ECE and lower ﬁdelity
(measured by test teacher-student agreement and test teacher-student KL). Therefore, the hypothesis
that s1 should be a higher ﬁdelity distillation of the teacher than s0 does hold, but the gain in ﬁdelity
does not result in s1 best replicating the teacher’s accuracy. The best attributes of s0 and s1 are
combined by s0∪1, which coincides with how unlabeled data is typically used in practice [2]. The
reason for this puzzling observation is simply that for the larger teachers ﬁdelity has not improved
enough to also improve generalization. In fact, the best teacher-student agreement is only around
85%, no improvement when compared to the results from extensive data augmentation in the last
section. We again ﬁnd that modifying the distillation data can slightly improve ﬁdelity, but the
evidence does not support blaming poor distillation ﬁdelity on the wrong choice of distillation data.
4Unlike Figure 1, for Figure 3 we generated new GAN samples every epoch, to mimic data augmentation.
7
