Does Knowledge Distillation Really Work?
Samuel Stanton
NYU
Pavel Izmailov
NYU
Polina Kirichenko
NYU
Alexander A. Alemi
Google Research
Andrew Gordon Wilson
NYU
Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a popular technique for training a small student network
to emulate a larger teacher model, such as an ensemble of networks. We show
that while knowledge distillation can improve student generalization, it does not
typically work as it is commonly understood: there often remains a surprisingly
large discrepancy between the predictive distributions of the teacher and the student,
even in cases when the student has the capacity to perfectly match the teacher.
We identify difﬁculties in optimization as a key reason for why the student is
unable to match the teacher. We also show how the details of the dataset used for
distillation play a role in how closely the student matches the teacher — and that
more closely matching the teacher paradoxically does not always lead to better
student generalization.
1
Introduction
Large, deep networks can learn representations that generalize well. While smaller, more efﬁcient
networks lack the inductive biases to ﬁnd these representations from training data alone, they may
have the capacity to represent these solutions [e.g., 2, 17, 29, 40]. Inﬂuential work on knowledge
distillation [20] argues that Bucil˘a et al. [5] “demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acquired
by a large ensemble of models [the teacher] can be transferred to a single small model [the student]”.
Indeed this quote encapsulates the conventional narrative of knowledge distillation: a student model
learns a high-ﬁdelity representation of a larger teacher, enabled by the teacher’s soft labels.
Conversely, in Figure 1 we show that with modern architectures knowledge distillation can lead to
students with very different predictions from their teachers, even when the student has the capacity to
perfectly match the teacher. Indeed, it is becoming well-known that in self-distillation the student
fails to match the teacher and, paradoxically, student generalization improves as a result [13, 36].
However, when the teacher is a large model (e.g. a deep ensemble) improvements in ﬁdelity translate
into improvements in generalization, as we show in Figure 1(b). For these large models there is still a
signiﬁcant accuracy gap between student and teacher, so ﬁdelity is aligned with generalization.
We will distinguish between ﬁdelity, the ability of a student to match a teacher’s predictions, and
generalization, the performance of a student in predicting unseen, in-distribution data. We show that
in many cases it is surprisingly difﬁcult to obtain good student ﬁdelity. In Section 5 we investigate
the hypothesis that low ﬁdelity is an identiﬁability problem that can be solved by augmenting the
distillation dataset. In Section 6 we investigate the hypothesis that low ﬁdelity is an optimization
problem resulting in a failure of the student to match the teacher even on the original training dataset.
We present a summary of our conclusions in Section 7.
Does knowledge distillation really work? In short: Yes, in the sense that it often improves student
generalization, though there is room for further improvement. No, in that knowledge distillation often
fails to live up to its name, transferring very limited knowledge from teacher to student.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.
arXiv:2106.05945v2  [cs.LG]  6 Dec 2021
