CKA (↑)
Init.
Agree. (↑)
KL (↓)
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Rand.
77.174 (0.352)
0.836 (0.016)
0.939 (0.017)
0.925 (0.027)
0.885 (0.011)
Teach.
77.098 (0.238)
0.838 (0.020)
0.951 (0.017)
0.937 (0.020)
0.890 (0.015)
Table 1: We examine whether ﬁdelity can be improved in the context of ResNet-20 self-distillation on
CIFAR-100 if the teacher and student share the same weight initialization. All metrics are computed
on the test set. A shared initialization does make the student slightly more similar to the teacher in
activation space (measured by CKA), but in function space the results are indistinguishable from
randomly initialized students. We report the mean and standard deviation, estimated from 10 trials.
The average teacher accuracy was 70.522 (0.412).
Is using the initial teacher weights enough for good ﬁdelity? If good ﬁdelity can be obtained
by initializing the student near the ﬁnal teacher weights, it is possible that similar results could be
obtained by initializing the student at the initial teacher weights. In Table 1 we compare students
distilled from random initializations with those initialized at the initial teacher weights. In addition to
the metrics reported in the rest of the paper, we also include the centered kernel alignment (CKA)
[26] of the preactivations of each of the teacher and student networks. There is a small increase in
CKA, indicating that sharing an initialization between teacher and student does increase alignment in
activation space, but functionally the students are identical to their randomly initialized counterparts –
there is no observable change in accuracy, agreement, or predictive KL when compared to random
initialization.
To summarize, we have at last identiﬁed a root cause of the ineffectiveness of all our previous
interventions on the knowledge distillation procedure. Knowledge distillation is unable to converge
to optimal student parameters, even when we know a solution and give the initialization a small head
start in the direction of an optimum. Indeed, while identiﬁability can be an issue, in order to match
the teacher on all inputs, the student has to at least match the teacher on the data used for distillation,
and achieve a near-optimal value of the distillation loss. Furthermore, the suboptimal convergence of
knowledge distillation appears to be a consequence of the optimization dynamics speciﬁcally, and not
simply initialization bias. In practice, optimization converges to sub-optimal solutions, leading to
poor distillation ﬁdelity.
7
Discussion
Our work provides several new key ﬁndings about knowledge distillation:
• Good student accuracy does not imply good distillation ﬁdelity: even outside of self-
distillation, the models with the best generalization do not always achieve the best ﬁdelity.
• Student ﬁdelity is correlated with calibration when distilling ensembles: although the
highest-ﬁdelity student is not always the most accurate, it is always the best calibrated.
• Optimization is challenging in knowledge distillation: even in cases when the student has
sufﬁcient capacity to match the teacher on the distillation data, it is unable to do so.
• There is a trade-off between optimization complexity and distillation data quality: Enlarging
the distillation dataset beyond the teacher training data makes it easier for the student to
identify the correct solution, but also makes an already difﬁcult optimization problem harder.
In standard deep learning, we are saved by not needing to solve the optimization problem well: while
it true that our training loss is highly multimodal, properties such as the ﬂatness of good solutions,
the inductive biases of the network, and the implicit biases of SGD, often enable good generalization
in practice. In knowledge distillation, however, good ﬁdelity is directly aligned with solving what
turns out to be an exceptionally difﬁcult optimization problem.
10
