Citation: Javed, A.; Awais, M.N.;
Qureshi, A.-u.-H.; Jawad, M.; Arshad,
J.; Larijani, H. Embedding Tree-Based
Intrusion Detection System in Smart
Thermostats for Enhanced IoT
Security. Sensors 2024, 24, 7320.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s24227320
Academic Editor: Gianluigi Ferrari
Received: 15 October 2024
Revised: 6 November 2024
Accepted: 15 November 2024
Published: 16 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Embedding Tree-Based Intrusion Detection System in Smart
Thermostats for Enhanced IoT Security
Abbas Javed 1
, Muhammad Naeem Awais 1, Ayyaz-ul-Haq Qureshi 2,*, Muhammad Jawad 1
, Jehangir Arshad 1
and Hadi Larijani 3
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, COMSATS University Islamabad, Lahore Campus,
Lahore 54000, Pakistan; abbasjaved@cuilahore.edu.pk (A.J.); naeem.awais@cuilahore.edu.pk (M.N.A.);
mjawad@cuilahore.edu.pk (M.J.); jehangirarshad@cuilahore.edu.pk (J.A.)
2
Department of Cyber Security and Networks, School of Computing, Engineering and Built Environment,
Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow G4 0BA, UK
3
SMART Technology Research Centre, Department of Cyber Security and Networks, School of Computing,
Engineering and Built Environment, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow G4 0BA, UK;
h.larijani@gcu.ac.uk
*
Correspondence: aqu2@gcu.ac.uk
Abstract: IoT devices with limited resources, and in the absence of gateways, become vulnerable to
various attacks, such as denial of service (DoS) and man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks. Intrusion
detection systems (IDS) are designed to detect and respond to these threats in IoT environments.
While machine learning-based IDS have typically been deployed at the edge (gateways) or in the
cloud, in the absence of gateways, the IDS must be embedded within the sensor nodes themselves.
Available datasets mainly contain features extracted from network traffic at the edge (e.g., Raspberry
Pi/computer) or cloud servers. We developed a unique dataset, named as Intrusion Detection in
the Smart Homes (IDSH) dataset, which is based on features retrievable from microcontroller-based
IoT devices. In this work, a Tree-based IDS is embedded into a smart thermostat for real-time
intrusion detection. The results demonstrated that the IDS achieved an accuracy of 98.71% for binary
classification with an inference time of 276 microseconds, and an accuracy of 97.51% for multi-
classification with an inference time of 273 microseconds. Real-time testing showed that the smart
thermostat is capable of detecting DoS and MITM attacks without relying on a gateway or cloud.
Keywords: intrusion detection system; embedded ML; TinyML; DoS; MITM; CatBoost
1. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) integrates a wide range of smart objects, devices, and wire-
less sensor nodes (WSNs) for seamless communication and data exchange. The applications
of IoT have been reported in smart homes, smart farming, smart cities, smart wearables,
healthcare, education, etc. [1]. It is estimated that the number of IoT devices will surpass
27 billion by 2025 [2]. Billions of IoT devices communicate with each other over the internet
and most of the IoT devices have limited memory and computational capabilities, making
them vulnerable to a wide range of attacks. These IoT devices are not designed to detect
and respond to security attacks [3].
Cybercriminals often target smart homes because they hold a high concentration of
valuable digital assets, including sensitive personal information, home security controls,
and access to connected devices, such as cameras and locks. These assets are attractive for
identity theft, financial fraud, or unauthorized surveillance, making smart homes prime
targets [4,5]. These devices are particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks due to occupants’
lack of knowledge, insecure IoT devices, weak security controls, and improper configura-
tions. Based on STRIDE taxonomy, the possible cyberattacks on smart homes are spoofing,
tampering, repudiation, information disclosure, DoS, and elevation of privilege [5]. In a
Sensors 2024, 24, 7320. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24227320
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
