Sensors 2024, 24, 7320
2 of 15
DoS attack, the smart device is overwhelmed with traffic by the adversary, and as a result,
the device stops working. In an MITM attack, the attacker secretly intercepts the communi-
cation between the sender and the receiver without either party being aware [6]. MITM
attacks can lead to repudiation and information disclosure attacks.
A smart home is a residence where appliances can be remotely controlled via the
internet. The smart home market is projected to grow to USD 633.20 billion by 2032 [7]. This
growth is largely driven by the adoption of IoT platforms. Key stakeholders are increasingly
focusing on developing smart home appliances that utilize IoT and machine learning.
Wifi-based smart thermostats are used in smart homes to control heating and cooling
appliances. However, according to Rambus [8], nearly 80% of IoT devices remain exposed
to potential cyberattacks, highlighting their significant vulnerability to security breaches.
These security threats present major challenges for the expansion of the IoT. Due to security
vulnerabilities in IoT devices used in smart homes, hackers can gain unauthorized access
to personal information and control of connected appliances. Unauthorized access to the
smart thermostat may result in high energy consumption and the occupant’s discomfort.
An IDS for IoT is a system designed to monitor and analyze network traffic to identify
and react to intrusions and anomalies, safeguarding the security and integrity of the IoT
network. Most of the work on IDS for IoT systems has been simulation-based using
existing datasets and real-time implementation has been lacking [9–14]. IoT devices have
limited computational resources and in many cases, malicious/hacked IoT devices remain
undetected and are only detected when they stop working. This could be disastrous for
some applications and may result in heavy losses.
Raspberry Pi-based gateways function as intermediary devices that connect local IoT
devices to the cloud. They perform essential tasks such as data preprocessing, filtering,
and traffic monitoring. Furthermore, these gateways can improve the security of the IoT
network by hosting lightweight IDS to detect intrusions and anomalies in real-time. Few
authors have implemented IDS on Raspberry Pi-based gateways of smart homes [15–18]
to detect intrusions. However, many commercially available WiFi-based IoT devices of
smart homes are connected to the cloud without having Raspberry Pi/computer-based
gateways on which IDS can be deployed. Consequently, these IoT devices are easy targets
for DoS/Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) and MITM attacks. Therefore, the security of
these IoT devices can be enhanced by embedded ML-based IDS.
Embedded ML, also called TinyML, allows embedding ML models in microcontroller-
based IoT devices. Numerous applications of embedded ML/TinyML have recently been
reported. A few examples include an intrusion detection system for IoT [19], urban noise
data analysis [20], fault diagnosis [21], and soil quality monitoring [22].
Researchers have traditionally implemented IDS on gateways or the cloud due to
the availability of network traffic analyzers like Wireshark (https://www.wireshark.org
(accessed on 6 October 2024)) and tcpdump (https://www.tcpdump.org/ (accessed on
6 October 2024)). In our recent work [19], we introduced a novel approach by embedding an
XGBoost-based IDS for binary classification in an ESP32 (https://www.espressif.com/en/
products/socs/esp32 (accessed on 6 October 2024))-powered smart thermostat. The smart
thermostat updates the HVAC status, indoor air temperature, and humidity on a webpage,
allowing occupants to control it remotely. The lightweight IP (lwIP) (https://github.
com/espressif/esp-lwip (accessed on 6 October 2024)) library for the ESP32 provides
restricted access to network features. We developed a unique dataset named as the IDSH
dataset [23] for intrusion detection in smart thermostats by using a Raspberry Pi-based
adversary node to generate DoS and MITM attacks. The dataset is based on the features
extractable from the smart thermostat using the lwIP library. This dataset is unique because
existing datasets rely on packet capture tools (like Wireshark, tcpdump etc.) running
on single-board computer-based gateways or workstations. In this work, we enhanced
the performance of the IDS in terms of accuracy and computational efficiency through
the novel implementation of CatBoost-based IDS on the ESP32 microcontroller. CatBoost
implementation is not supported in existing ML libraries that port trained ML models to
