Sensors 2024, 24, 7320
4 of 15
traffic and DDoS attacks, which was used to train SVM, Logistic Regression (LR), and DT.
The results showed that DT outperformed other techniques with an accuracy of 99%.
The authors in [30] improved the precision of IDS using the Shapley (SHAP) value-
based FS technique. The accuracy of the convolution neural network (CNN) and random
forest (RF) using the FS technique for the CICIDS 2017 and NSL-KDD datasets was 98% with
10 features. In [31], the authors proposed a self-evolving host-based intrusion detection
system (SEHIDS) that allows IoT devices to build their customized ANN model based on
the traffic characteristics. The proposed technique used a multi-layer perceptron model
for signature-based classification and a replicator neural network (ReNN) for anomaly-
based intrusion detection. The authors tested their technique on the BoT-IoT, TON-IOT,
and IoTID20 datasets. The authors claimed to have achieved an average true positive rate of
1. Similarly, the authors in [12] proposed a transformer-based network intrusion detection
system (NIDS) by combining network traffic-based and data-based NIDS. The authors used
the TON_IoT dataset and results showed that the proposed technique achieved 98.39%
accuracy for binary classification and 97.06% for multi-classification. The authors in [32]
proposed federated learning (FL)-based gated recurrent units (GRUs) NIDS for industrial
IoT (IIoT). The accuracy of the training was improved by incorporating deep reinforcement
learning (DRL). The results showed that the proposed technique performed better than
non-FL and other variants of FL for intrusion detection.
In [33], the authors developed a lightweight IDS for IoT using cloud–edge collab-
oration. A stack-sparsed autoencoder (SSAE) was used for dimension reduction and a
temporal convolution network (TCN) was utilized for intrusion detection. The proposed
technique reduced the storage requirements, training time, and memory by 50% but the
accuracy of the technique was approximately equal to centralized trained models.
Tiny ML is a subset of edge ML that allows the trained model to run on microcon-
trollers. In [34], the authors proposed a TinyML-based ECG classification system. They
embedded a CNN model in the ECG device for classification, which reduces network band-
width utilization and latency. The results showed that the accuracy of the TinyML-based
classifier was 97%. The author in [35] embedded a unidirectional LSTM in a microcontroller
for solar power forecasting and achieved a test R2 of 0.9590. In [36], the authors used
TinyML for on-device anomaly detection by using the extreme value theory. The proposed
technique achieved an excellent accuracy of 99.80%.
The literature reviewed above has explored the approaches of implementing IDS on
gateways or on cloud servers. For successful IDS deployment on the edge, it must be
both accurate and computationally efficient to detect attacks promptly. Most of the work
has focused on deploying IDS on the edge (Raspberry Pi-based gateways) or in the cloud.
However, IoT devices in smart homes are vulnerable to external threats due to their limited
computational power and the absence of gateways. Therefore, there is a pressing need to
develop IDS that can be embedded in IoT devices without relying on gateways or the cloud.
3. Materials and Methods
In this work, we considered the application of smart thermostats in smart homes.
The thermostat is designed to update the indoor air environment (temperature and hu-
midity levels), and air conditioner control signal (ON/OFF) on an Amazon Web Service
(AWS) server. The webpage hosted on the AWS server shows the indoor air environment
parameters, and based on temperature and humidity levels, occupants can send control
signals to the air conditioner through a webpage. We proposed to embed ML-based IDS
in smart thermostats for on-device intrusion detection. The proposed architecture of em-
bedded IDS is shown in Figure 1. The bi-directional communication between cloud and
smart thermostats can be disrupted/manipulated by an adversary node. Since for most IoT
devices, Raspberry Pi-based gateways are not available for the implementation of IDS, we
proposed to embed an IDS in a smart thermostat in this work.
