Sensors 2024, 24, 7320
3 of 15
microcontrollers, so we quantized the trained CatBoost model to implement it in resource-
constrained microcontrollers.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
•
A novel, computationally efficient, decentralized multi-class IDS using the CatBoost
algorithm is proposed for deployment directly on IoT devices, without relying on
gateways (such as Raspberry Pi or computers) or cloud computing. The decentralized
multi-class IDS significantly improves detection accuracy by effectively handling
categorical data and missing values. The system demonstrates reduced inference time
on resource-constrained microcontrollers due to the fast prediction capability of the
algorithm, ensuring that potential attacks are detected and mitigated with minimal
latency. This enhances the robustness of the IDS across diverse IoT environments.
•
Quantization of CatBoost model to fit models into the limited memory and processing
capabilities of devices like the ESP32.
•
A detailed comparison was conducted between XGBoost- and CatBoost-based IDS
implementations on microcontroller-based IoT devices for binary and multi-class
classification of DoS and MITM attacks using the IDSH dataset. The evaluation
focused on both algorithms’ accuracy, inference time, and storage requirements.
•
Additionally, we evaluated the impact of feature selection on the accuracy of the IDS
and the computational burden on resource-constrained IoT devices.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Related work is presented in Section 2
and the proposed methodology is described in Section 3. The results are discussed in
Section 4, followed by conclusion and future work in Section 5.
2. Related Work
The authors in [24] developed the permission and credibility-based IDS (PCIDS) using
a decision tree (DT) for IoT devices to protect them against DoS and MITM attacks from
adversaries. The PCIDS categorized the user requests into normal, abnormal, and risky
categories by calculating the importance ratio, minimum credibility index, and maximum
credibility index. The experimental results showed that the accuracy of PCIDS was 94.7%.
The authors proposed to deploy the PCIDS on the gateway; however, hardware implemen-
tation of PCIDS on the gateway was not achieved.
In [25], the authors prevented the MITM attack on the Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT) by transmitting the data signatures derived from locality-sensitive hashing (LSH).
Furthermore, the authors also used the Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) to
prevent modification attacks. The results showed that the proposed technique achieves a
high detection rate with a false alarm rate (FAR) of 3%. In a recent study by Tekin et al. [26],
the authors conducted a comparative analysis of the energy consumption of ML-based IDS
on IoT devices, showing that on-device DT algorithms perform best in terms of training
time, inference time, and power efficiency. However, the proposed technique was not tested
in a real IoT environment.
In [27], a lightweight ML-based IDS is presented to be deployed on the edge side to
detect impersonation attacks. Support vector machines (SVMs) were trained on the WiFi
Intrusion Dataset to detect intrusions on the edge. The overall accuracy presented by this
system was 98.22%. The authors in [18] introduced Deep-IDS for detecting DoS, DDoS,
MITM, brute force, and replay attacks on Raspberry Pi-based edge servers/gateways.
The Deep-IDS was trained using the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and achieved an accuracy of
97.67%. Similarly, a two-layered IDS was proposed in [28] to deploy IDS on Raspberry Pi-
based the edge side and on cloud servers. In the first stage, an extra tree (ET)-based classifier
was used for binary classification, and in the second stage, an ensemble technique was
utilized which combined ET, RF, and deep neural network (DNN) for multi-classification.
The proposed technique was tested on multiple datasets.
The IDS for real-time detection of DDoS attacks in smart homes based on software-
defined networks (SDNs) was proposed in [29]. The authors collected the dataset of normal
