Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1105
We compare the attack detection results obtained from
the ﬁrst stage of our framework (which utilizes all fea-
tures, i.e., 59 features for the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset and
36 features for the CICIoT2023 dataset) with those from
the second stage after the Feature Reduction. Note that the
5G PFCP dataset is not used for the model performance
comparison before and after the Feature Reduction due to
its small initial feature set size (9 features). Instead, it is
used to evaluate our framework’s capability to detect and
explain 5G-speciﬁc control-plane attacks using both global
andlocalexplanations.TheFeatureReductionprocess,based
on SHAP Global Explanation and statistical methods, selects
features that are both statistically signiﬁcant and practically
impactful,improvingtheframework’sefﬁciencywithoutsac-
riﬁcing prediction accuracy. To assess the effect of Feature
Reduction, we examine the XGBoost model performance
by applying the top 5, 10, 20, and 30 features. This evalua-
tion enables us to understand the trade-offs between reducing
computational overhead and maintaining high detection per-
formance, especially for datasets with a larger number of
initial features.
4.2.1 Results of SHAP global explanation, feature selection,
and feature reduction processes
Figures 2, 3, and 4 display the SHAP global summary
plots for the Portmap, SYN Flood, HTTP Flood, Slowloris,
PFCP Session Deletion, and PFCP Session Establishment
attacks, respectively, highlighting the most inﬂuential fea-
tures on model predictions. The Y-axis lists the features
in the order of their importance, while the X-axis, indi-
cating the SHAP values, shows each feature’s impact on
the model’s prediction. Positive SHAP values push pre-
dictions towards the malicious class, while negative values
push towards the benign class. The explanations for two dis-
tinct DDoS attack types: volumetric (Portmap, SYN Flood,
HTTP Flood) and slow (Slowloris) are investigated. For
the Portmap attack, the ‘Fwd Packet Length Min’
feature emerges as the most signiﬁcant. Lower values of
this feature, indicated by blue dots, signiﬁcantly decrease
the model’s output and push the prediction towards the
benign class. The ‘Inbound’ feature is the second most
important one, with higher values (red dots) generally push-
ing the prediction towards the malicious class. Similarly,
for the SYN Flood attack, ‘syn_flag_number’ and
‘Number’ emerge as the most signiﬁcant features, with
high values of these features strongly indicating SYN Flood
attack samples. The ‘Header_Length’ feature is the
next most important one, where lower values are indica-
tive of SYN Flood attacks. For the HTTP Flood attack, the
‘Number’ feature, representing the number of packets in
a ﬂow, is the most inﬂuential one. The ‘fin_count’ fea-
ture, which counts packets with the FIN ﬂag set, also plays a
crucial role. Higher values tend to push predictions towards
Fig. 2 SHAP global explanation results for Portmap and SYN Flood attacks
123
