Annals of Telecommunications (2025) 80:1095–1120
1099
a few IoT traces, none of the listed IDS frameworks address
control-plane trafﬁc in 5G/6G networks, leaving emerging
PFCP-based threats uncharted. (ii) Lack of dimensionality
control: the majority retain the full feature space, which
inﬂates explanation latency and hinders real-time deploy-
ment. (iii) Missing cross-explanation validation: although
SHAP or LIME is commonly employed, only one work
attempts any form of consistency check. (iv) Sparse report-
ing of computational cost: none of the past studies quantify
the time required to generate explanations, making it difﬁ-
cult to judge practical feasibility. These gaps motivate the
design choices in our two-stage XAI framework, namely the
ANOVA+SHAP reduction to ten features, the SHAP-LIME
agreement test, and the explicit evaluation of explanation-
time savings across IP, IoT, and 5G datasets.
While ANOVA offers a statistically rigorous and compu-
tationally efﬁcient method for feature selection, it is most
effective when integrated with XAI techniques like SHAP
for global and local explanations. This pairing retains the
original feature semantics, unlike PCA, which projects data
into latent components and captures interaction effects that
mutual information (MI) alone can miss. In our initial exper-
iment, PCA and MI top-10 ﬁlters achieved higher F1 Score
(0.999 and 0.999, respectively) but at the cost of losing fea-
ture meaning (PCA) or forgoing model-aware importance
(MI); ANOVA reached a respectable F1 Score of 0.997
with the fastest LIME explanation generation time (2.36s),
thus, the ANOVA–SHAP integration offers the best balance
between interpretability, statistical validity, and computa-
tional efﬁciency. Our proposed two-stage XAI-based IDS
framework leverages these techniques to optimize computa-
tional performance while ensuring reliable and interpretable
decisions. This approach is beneﬁcial, e.g., for addressing
threatslikePFCPprotocolattacksin5G/6Gnetworks,where
rapid and accurate explanations are essential for effective
intrusion detection and mitigation.
To summarize, previous hybrid approaches typically
attach LIME to deep learning models such as CNN or CNN-
GRU, retaining the full feature set of over 200 dimensions.
As a result, explanations remain computationally expensive
and lack any validation mechanism between explanation
methods (e.g., studies using LIME and SHAP for explain-
able IDS in VANETs). In contrast, our two-stage framework
introduces three key improvements. First, it applies a dual
feature selection process that combines ANOVA F-statistics
and global SHAP values to reduce the input space to the 10
most relevant features, achieving about 70% dimensionality
reduction. Second, it replaces the complex CNN-GRU with
a lightweight XGBoost classiﬁer trained on this reduced fea-
ture set, reducing LIME explanation time from 36 to 4.9s (an
87% improvement) on CICIoT-Slowloris, while maintaining
F1 Score ≥99% across CIC-DDoS2019, CICIoT2023, and
5G PFCP datasets. Third, it validates each LIME explanation
Algorithm 1 Two-Stage XAI-Based IDS Framework
1: Input: Tabular dataset D = (X, y)
2: Output: Trained model M, explanations (eSHAP, eLIME), and con-
sistency ﬂag γ
3: // Stage 1: Pre-processing
4: Drop ID columns, handle NaN/Inf, remove constant features
5: Encode labels y; split D into Dtr, Dte
6: // Stage 2: Feature Evaluation
7: Compute ANOVA F-scores on Dtr
8: Train temporary model
˜
M using XGBoost
9: Obtain SHAP importances from
˜
M
10: Normalize and combine (40% ANOVA + 60% SHAP) scores
11: Select top K = 10 features F⋆
12: // Stage 3: Model Training
13: Reduce Dtr, Dte to F⋆
14: Train ﬁnal model M on Dtr
15: // Stage 4: Online Inference and Explanation (per instance x)
16: for each test instance x do
17:
ˆy ←M(x)
18:
eSHAP ←TreeExplainer(M, x)
19:
eLIME ←LimeExplainer(M, x)
20:
if top-ℓfeatures in both explanations agree then
21:
γ ←1
22:
else
23:
γ ←0
24:
end if
25:
return ( ˆy, eSHAP, eLIME, γ )
26: end for
by comparing it to SHAP outputs, identifying inconsistencies
and enhancing reliability. Together, these steps offer faster,
more efﬁcient, and more reliable explanations than previous
methods.
3 Proposed XAI-based IDS framework
3.1 Overview of the proposed framework
Figure 1 presents the architecture of the proposed XAI-based
IDS framework, which operates as a non-amortized approach
to generate explanations for each individual instance. Unlike
amortized techniques that reuse generalized explanation
models, this design ensures that the interpretability out-
put is tailored to the speciﬁc feature contributions of every
detection, a critical property for high-stakes IDS scenarios
where per-instance transparency is essential. The frame-
work integrates three originality aspects absent from prior
XAI–IDS studies: (i) a dual-stage feature selection pipeline
that fuses statistical ranking (ANOVA) with model-based
global importance (SHAP) to achieve substantial dimen-
sionality reduction with minimal performance loss, (ii) a
cross-validation mechanism that compares SHAP and LIME
local explanations to detect inconsistencies, thus adding a
reliability layer to interpretability, and (iii) a time-efﬁciency
evaluation component that measures explanation generation
latency under realistic IDS workloads. Operationally, the
123
