On Explaining Knowledge Distillation: Measuring and Visualising the
Knowledge Transfer Process
Gereziher Adhane
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
gradhane@uoc.edu
Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
mohammad.dehshibi@yahoo.com
Dennis Vetter
Goethe University Frankfurt
vetter@em.uni-frankfurt.de
David Masip
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
dmasipr@uoc.edu
Gemma Roig
Goethe University Frankfurt
roig@cs.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) remains challenging due to
the opaque nature of the knowledge transfer process from a
Teacher to a Student, making it difficult to address certain
issues related to KD. To address this, we proposed UniCAM,
a novel gradient-based visual explanation method, which
effectively interprets the knowledge learned during KD. Our
experimental results demonstrate that with the guidance of
the Teacher’s knowledge, the Student model becomes more
efficient, learning more relevant features while discarding
those that are not relevant. We refer to the features learned
with the Teacher’s guidance as distilled features and the
features irrelevant to the task and ignored by the Student
as residual features. Distilled features focus on key aspects
of the input, such as textures and parts of objects. In con-
trast, residual features demonstrate more diffused attention,
often targeting irrelevant areas, including the backgrounds
of the target objects. In addition, we proposed two novel
metrics: the feature similarity score (FSS) and the rele-
vance score (RS), which quantify the relevance of the dis-
tilled knowledge. Experiments on the CIFAR10, ASIRRA,
and Plant Disease datasets demonstrate that UniCAM and
the two metrics offer valuable insights to explain the KD
process.
1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a crucial
technique in deep learning, especially in computer vision.
It aims to develop efficient models without compromising
performance [4, 5, 19, 31, 44]. By transferring knowledge
from typically a complex Teacher model to a simpler Stu-
dent model, KD can potentially address the increasing de-
mand for deploying robust yet lightweight models in prac-
tical scenarios [43]. Nevertheless, despite its widespread
adoption, the underlying mechanisms of KD remain some-
what opaque, thus impeding its broader application and the-
oretical comprehension.
The current research in knowledge distillation (KD) is
confronted with four main challenges, including (1) un-
derstanding the specific knowledge that is transferred from
Teacher to Student [3]; (2) evaluating whether KD improves
the Student’s focus on task-relevant features compared to
independent training [5, 40]; (3) measuring the importance
of features adopted or ignored by the Student for the tar-
get task; (4) addressing and resolving KD failures, mainly
when there are significant architectural differences between
Teacher and Student models [29,37,38].
Existing visual explainability methods for Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), like Grad-CAM [35], are not
equipped to tackle these KD-specific challenges. While ef-
fective for single-model predictions, these methods cannot
capture the nuance of knowledge transfer between models
or quantify the relevance of distilled knowledge. Specif-
ically, Grad-CAM focuses on the importance of class-
specific features within a single model. However, it does not
distinguish between knowledge inherited from the Teacher
and knowledge independently learned by the Student.
To address these issues, we introduce a new framework
for improving the explainability of KD. We will first define
the key terms used in this paper to ensure clarity. Distilled
features are unique to the Student and are acquired through
KD-based training, which the Student considers relevant to
the task. Residual features are present in the Teacher (Base
model) but are not adopted by the Student, as the Student
finds them irrelevant to the task during KD-based training.
We used Unique features to collectively refer to the dis-
tilled and residual features, as they are unique to the Student
and the Base model, respectively. Throughout this text, we
will use the term Base model to refer to the model which
This WACV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
3467
