A. Awasthi et al.: TICNN—A Hybrid Light-Weight CNN for Large Imbalanced Multi-Class Datasets
FIGURE 2. Proposed TIGAN framework illustrating a hybrid sampling technique for addressing class imbalance. The process begins with
imbalanced classes, applies a threshold to differentiate between minority and majority classes, then uses TIGAN (Threshold-Integrated Generative
Adversarial Network) for synthetic image generation to augment minority classes and removes excess images from majority classes, ultimately
achieving a balanced sample size across all classes.
high-outlier threshold T
=
Q3 + 1.5 × IQR yields
T = 100 + 1.5(80) = 220. Consequently, TIGAN will
synthesize 210 and 200 new samples for the first two classes
respectively, and downsample the majority class from 500 to
220. This ensures the model is not overwhelmed by the
majority class while providing sufficient representative data
for minority threats.
This approach allows us to balance the dataset by either
targeting the median class count or adjusting for outliers,
providing flexibility based on the specific distribution of the
class image counts.
This hybrid sampling strategy provides a significant
practical advantage: it maintains the diversity of the majority
class through intelligent downsampling while aggressively
augmenting sporadic minority classes. By operating in the
image domain, TIGAN avoids the computational out-of-
memory errors typically encountered when applying SMOTE
or ADASYN to massive 42-million-record tabular datasets
that may scale it up to more than 100 million records, which
makes it more difficult to process.
Algorithm 2 Class Balancing Using Hybrid-Sampling
Input: Class set C = {c1, c2, . . . , cn}, threshold T.
Output: Balanced dataset with each class having exactly T
images.
1: for each class ci ∈C do
2:
if N(ci) < T then
3:
Augment the class using TIGAN:
4:
TIGAN(ci) →Generate images for ci
5:
else
6:
Delete excess images to ensure T images:
7:
N(ci) ←T
8:
end if
9: end for
10: return Balanced dataset with all classes C containing
exactly T images.
In the TIGAN framework given in Fig. 3. and Fig. 4.,
involves two main components that are the generator g and the
discriminator d. The discriminator’s goal is to differentiate
between authentic images and those that are generated
(fake) [25]. This objective is mathematically expressed
through a loss function, Jdisc, which is formulated as follows:
Jdisc = Ex∼preal(x)

log d(x)

+ Es∼platent(s)

log (1 −d(g(s, y)))

(5)
Here, the equation Ex∼pdata(x)

log d(x)

, shows the expected
logarithmic probability that the discriminator correctly
classifies real images from the data distribution pdata(x).
The other equation, Es∼platent(s)

log(1 −d(G(s, y)))

, reflects
the expected logarithmic probability that the discriminator
correctly identifies generated images (produced by the
generator using a random noise vector z and class label y)
as fake. The discriminator uses these two components,
leading to a final loss defined as -Jdisc. During training, the
discriminator’s weights are updated to maximize this loss
through back-propagation, enhancing its ability to correctly
classify real and fake images. Conversely, the generator aims
to produce images that the discriminator classifies as real.
This objective is represented by the generator’s loss function,
Jgen, which is defined as:
Jgen = Es∼platent(s)

log f (g(s, y))

(6)
This expression captures the expected log probability that
the discriminator assigns a high probability to the images
generated by g. To facilitate training, the generator aims
to minimize this loss, which can also be represented as
-Jgen. This adversarial setup leads to a dynamic where both
networks continuously improve, resulting in the generation
of high-quality synthetic images conditioned on specified
class labels. The technique does oversampling for the major
classes and under-sampling for minor classes based on a
determined threshold, which balances the data and is trained
on the proposed TICNN model.
Distinct from tabular-specific GANs like CTGAN [9]
or TMG-GAN [5], which model column distributions
using Gaussian mixtures, TIGAN operates directly in the
transformed image domain. This allows the generator to
use transposed convolutions to synthesize complex feature
dependencies spatially, avoiding the mode collapse often
seen in tabular GANs when dealing with high-cardinality
features. Regarding the balancing threshold T, unlike static
sampling ratios used in SMOTE, our approach dynamically
VOLUME 14, 2026
23417
