A. Awasthi et al.: TICNN—A Hybrid Light-Weight CNN for Large Imbalanced Multi-Class Datasets
TABLE 1. Dataset details.
RM×N is the original dataset with real-valued entries and
ZM×N is the scaled dataset with integer entries representing
RGB pixel values after normalization [26]. To normalize the
feature values to the range suitable for RGB pixel values (0 to
255), we apply min-max scaling. The normalization function
S : R →[0, 255] is defined as Eq. No. 1, where Dj is the
j-th column (feature) of D. After applying this transformation,
we obtain a scaled dataset ˜D ∈ZM×N.
S(di,j) =
di,j −min(Dj)
max(Dj) −min(Dj) × 255
(1)
Unlike prior image-based IDS approaches that merely
map binary feature states or use grayscale representations,
our approach transforms continuous tabular features into a
dense 3D RGB latent space. This is fundamentally distinct
because it preserves the scalar magnitude of attack features
through channel-wise depth (R, G, B), allowing the CNN
to learn inter-feature correlations as spatial textures rather
than isolated values. Furthermore, by quantizing 32-bit
floating-point tabular data into 8-bit integers (0-255 pixel
values), we achieve a theoretical 4× memory compression.
This explains the significant reduction in RAM usage
observed in Figure 8, as the model processes compact tensor
representations rather than sparse, high-dimensional tabular
vectors.
To produce an RGB image, it is necessary to reshape the
transformed data ˜D where R represents the total number
of rows in the image and C signifies the total number of
columns across the Red, Green and Blue color channels,
respectively. This transformation produces a structure output
based on Algorithm 1, resulting in an image dataset termed as
IR×C×3. Table 1 represents the dataset details generated using
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Image Generation Algorithm
Input: V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} — Sequence of pixel vectors.
P ∈Z+ — Required number of pixels.
Z ∈Z+ — Number of padding pixels.
Output: I ∈IR×C×3 — Generated image tensor.
1: N ←|V|
// Number of available pixel vectors
2: if N ≥P then
3:
I ←reshape(V, (R, C, 3))
4: else
5:
Z ←P −N
6:
Vzero ←0Z
// Zero-padding vector
7:
V ←V ∪Vzero
8:
I ←reshape(V, (R, C, 3))
9: end if
10: return I
B. PROPOSED TIGAN AND HYBRID-SAMPLING
FRAMEWORK THAT RESOLVED RQ2
Various dataset-balancing techniques and algorithms are used
to generate synthetic data. Two primary approaches for
handling class imbalance in tabular data are oversampling
and undersampling. However, these methods come with
significant limitations in highly imbalanced scenarios. In the
case of oversampling, especially when the minority-to-
majority class ratio is extremely low, the IDS (Intrusion
Detection System) model tends to become synthetic-biased—
favoring the artificially generated samples over real ones,
which compromises generalization and detection accuracy.
On the other hand, undersampling in such cases can result
in up to 99% data loss, discarding valuable information
from the majority class and degrading model performance.
To address this issue, we proposed a hybrid sampling
algorithm that finds a threshold value and generates new
images or removes excess image samples by defining a
threshold value. To determine a suitable threshold T for
class balancing in our dataset, we calculate several key
statistical measures across the class distributions. Let C =
{c1, c2, . . . , cn} represent the set of classes, each with an
image count N(ci) for class ci.
First, we calculate the median m of the image counts,
which serves as a central measure of our class distribution.
The median m is formulated as:
m =



N

c n
2

if n is odd
N

c n
2 −1

+ N

c n
2

2
if n is even
(2)
In addition, we compute the 25th percentile Q1 and the 75th
percentile Q3 of the image counts vector N
=
[N(c1),
N(c2), . . . , N(cn)]T , which describe the lower and upper
quartiles, respectively. These are essential for calculating the
interquartile range (IQR) [27], which is given by:
IQR = Q3 −Q1
(3)
The upper bound for outliers is then defined as Q3 + 1.5 ·
IQR, allowing us to set an alternative threshold that considers
high outlier values. Specifically, the threshold T can be set
based on the distribution characteristics, as follows:
T =
(
m
(using Median Count)
Q3 + 1.5 · IQR
(to capture High Outliers)
(4)
Working Example of IQR Thresholding: To illustrate
the application of Equation 4, consider an IoT dataset
where the sample counts for five attack classes are
{10, 20, 50, 100, 500}. Here, the quartiles are Q1 = 20 and
Q3
=
100, resulting in an IQR of 80. Applying the
23416
VOLUME 14, 2026
