A. Awasthi et al.: TICNN—A Hybrid Light-Weight CNN for Large Imbalanced Multi-Class Datasets
frequently
adopted,
optimized
through
hyperparameter
tuning. It achieved high accuracy but is constrained to
major attack classes or binary classification, limiting its
generalizability to broader IoT threats [1]. Some existing
research on multi-class classification used a few attack
classes rather than all the attack classes in the IDS datasets
for developing an IDS system. The IDS system performed
well for attack and benign classes but failed at macro-level
minority classes classification, which was very poor [2].
The Fig. 1. illustrates an Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
monitoring network traffic containing two types of DDoS
attacks: a prevalent ICMP Flood and a less frequent HTTP
Flood. This IDS model was trained on data where ICMP
Flood samples significantly outnumbered HTTP Flood
samples, which shows that IDS effectively identifies and
mitigates major ICMP attacks. In contrast, its ability to
detect the minor HTTP Flood attack is compromised, which
showcases the challenge of data imbalance leading to poor
generalization for underrepresented threats.
FIGURE 1. Impact of skewed training data: IDS effectively detects
majority DDoS ICMP attacks (red) but misses minority DDoS HTTP attacks
(purple) in live traffic.
To solve the data imbalance problem the existing
research solutions applied synthetic data generation tech-
niques using Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN),
Magento, ADASYN, SMOTE, etc, to oversample the minor-
ity classes [3]. However, the dataset sizes are minimal to
process the text IDS data, and these techniques utilize higher
computational resources; at the same time, they are omitting
sub-class classification and its imbalance issues; most of the
undersample classes are not considered in the IDS, which
creates severe security issues [4], [5]. To further solve the
imbalanced problem, we have proposed work that transforms
large datasets into 2D images for faster, resource-efficient
training to minimize the duration of training and enhance the
classification of various classes and their sub-classes. TIGAN
applies optimized hybrid sampling to balance classes by
generating synthetic data that helps to upsample the minority
classes and downsample the majority classes. The TICNN
model, trained on this balanced data, is evaluated with the
CICIoT2023, CICIDS2017 IDS datasets, covering multiple
attack class types and one benign class, achieving robust
subclass-level anomaly detection.
Advanced machine/deep learning-based intrusion detec-
tion systems are proposed by many researchers, but there are
still a lot of research issues which were not yet resolved:
RQ1 While techniques like sampling [2], [6] and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7] are being actively
explored to address data imbalance, how can we
develop DL models that achieve both high accuracy
and efficiency when classifying imbalanced data,
particularly for rare or minority attack sub-classes [8]?
RQ2 The synthetic data generation done by previous
research has a synthetic bias. How can we design a
sampling method and GAN that effectively generate
correct amount of synthetic data?
RQ3 With growing dataset sizes and model complexity,
how can we ensure that DL-based IDS remain com-
putationally efficient for real-time deployment without
compromising classification accuracy, especially when
dealing with high-dimensional data and multiple attack
classes [9]?
The primary contributions of this work, which differentiate
it from existing literature that often focuses on majority-class
binary classification and high computational IDS models not
feasible for existing scenarios, are as follows: (1) We propose
a dense 2D RGB latent space transformation for tabular
data that achieves a 4× theoretical memory compression,
addressing the memory bottlenecks of traditional IDS.
(2) We introduce the TIGAN framework, which utilizes an
adaptive IQR-based thresholding rule that helps mitigate
the effects of synthetic bias associated with traditional
GAN-based techniques of oversampling and undersampling
RGB image data. (3) We develop the TICNN architecture.
The lightweight model employs Global Average Pooling
to achieve 1.81 million parameters while attaining 99.56%
macro accuracy. In contrast to past efforts that relied solely
on optimizing ensembles, we focus on optimizing both the
granularity of detection for smaller minority subclasses and
computational efficiency to facilitate IoT deployment at the
edge of the network.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Researchers have developed anomaly-based Intrusion Detec-
tion Systems (IDS) that are robust and have success in
attack detection in IoT networks. However, traditional IDS
measures often fall short when faced with the unique
challenges of IoT environments, such as device heterogeneity,
resource limitations, and the sheer volume of data generated.
Consequently, researchers are shifting more towards Machine
Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) techniques to
develop more adaptive and effective IDS [9], [10].
A significant body of research focuses on applying various
DL architectures to enhance IDS performance. Early work
included the development of optimized Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) combined with Transfer Learning to
secure the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [1]. Transfer learning,
which allows pre-trained models to be fine-tuned for specific
23414
VOLUME 14, 2026
