f3
f2
f1
f3
f2
f1
hapley
(A)
(B)
Figure 2: (A) The Shapley kernel weighting is symmetric when all possible z′ vectors are ordered
by cardinality there are 215 vectors in this example. This is distinctly different from previous
heuristically chosen kernels. (B) Compositional models such as deep neural networks are comprised
of many simple components. Given analytic solutions for the Shapley values of the components, fast
approximations for the full model can be made using DeepLIFT’s style of back-propagation.
Max SHAP
Using a permutation formulation of Shapley values, we can calculate the probability that each input
will increase the maximum value over every other input. Doing this on a sorted order of input values
lets us compute the Shapley values of a max function with M inputs in O(M 2) time instead of
O(M2M). See Supplementary Material for the full algorithm.
Deep SHAP (DeepLIFT + Shapley values)
While Kernel SHAP can be used on any model, including deep models, it is natural to ask whether
there is a way to leverage extra knowledge about the compositional nature of deep networks to improve
computational performance. We ﬁnd an answer to this question through a previously unappreciated
connection between Shapley values and DeepLIFT [8]. If we interpret the reference value in Equation
3 as representing E[x] in Equation 12, then DeepLIFT approximates SHAP values assuming that
the input features are independent of one another and the deep model is linear. DeepLIFT uses a
linear composition rule, which is equivalent to linearizing the non-linear components of a neural
network. Its back-propagation rules deﬁning how each component is linearized are intuitive but were
heuristically chosen. Since DeepLIFT is an additive feature attribution method that satisﬁes local
accuracy and missingness, we know that Shapley values represent the only attribution values that
satisfy consistency. This motivates our adapting DeepLIFT to become a compositional approximation
of SHAP values, leading to Deep SHAP.
Deep SHAP combines SHAP values computed for smaller components of the network into SHAP
values for the whole network. It does so by recursively passing DeepLIFT’s multipliers, now deﬁned
in terms of SHAP values, backwards through the network as in Figure 2B:
mxjf3 =
φi(f3, x)
xj −E[xj]
(13)
∀j∈{1,2}
myifj = φi(fj, y)
yi −E[yi]
(14)
myif3 =
2
X
j=1
myifjmxjf3
chain rule
(15)
φi(f3, y) ≈myif3(yi −E[yi])
linear approximation
(16)
Since the SHAP values for the simple network components can be efﬁciently solved analytically
if they are linear, max pooling, or an activation function with just one input, this composition
rule enables a fast approximation of values for the whole model. Deep SHAP avoids the need to
heuristically choose ways to linearize components. Instead, it derives an effective linearization from
the SHAP values computed for each component. The max function offers one example where this
leads to improved attributions (see Section 5).
7
