(A)
(B)
SHAP
Shapley sampling
LIME
True Shapley value
Dense original model
Sparse original model
Feature importance
Figure 3: Comparison of three additive feature attribution methods: Kernel SHAP (using a debiased
lasso), Shapley sampling values, and LIME (using the open source implementation). Feature
importance estimates are shown for one feature in two models as the number of evaluations of the
original model function increases. The 10th and 90th percentiles are shown for 200 replicate estimates
at each sample size. (A) A decision tree model using all 10 input features is explained for a single
input. (B) A decision tree using only 3 of 100 input features is explained for a single input.
5
Computational and User Study Experiments
We evaluated the beneﬁts of SHAP values using the Kernel SHAP and Deep SHAP approximation
methods. First, we compared the computational efﬁciency and accuracy of Kernel SHAP vs. LIME
and Shapley sampling values. Second, we designed user studies to compare SHAP values with
alternative feature importance allocations represented by DeepLIFT and LIME. As might be expected,
SHAP values prove more consistent with human intuition than other methods that fail to meet
Properties 1-3 (Section 2). Finally, we use MNIST digit image classiﬁcation to compare SHAP with
DeepLIFT and LIME.
5.1
Computational Efﬁciency
Theorem 2 connects Shapley values from game theory with weighted linear regression. Kernal SHAP
uses this connection to compute feature importance. This leads to more accurate estimates with fewer
evaluations of the original model than previous sampling-based estimates of Equation 8, particularly
when regularization is added to the linear model (Figure 3). Comparing Shapley sampling, SHAP, and
LIME on both dense and sparse decision tree models illustrates both the improved sample efﬁciency
of Kernel SHAP and that values from LIME can differ signiﬁcantly from SHAP values that satisfy
local accuracy and consistency.
5.2
Consistency with Human Intuition
Theorem 1 provides a strong incentive for all additive feature attribution methods to use SHAP
values. Both LIME and DeepLIFT, as originally demonstrated, compute different feature importance
values. To validate the importance of Theorem 1, we compared explanations from LIME, DeepLIFT,
and SHAP with user explanations of simple models (using Amazon Mechanical Turk). Our testing
assumes that good model explanations should be consistent with explanations from humans who
understand that model.
We compared LIME, DeepLIFT, and SHAP with human explanations for two settings. The ﬁrst
setting used a sickness score that was higher when only one of two symptoms was present (Figure 4A).
The second used a max allocation problem to which DeepLIFT can be applied. Participants were told
a short story about how three men made money based on the maximum score any of them achieved
(Figure 4B). In both cases, participants were asked to assign credit for the output (the sickness score
or money won) among the inputs (i.e., symptoms or players). We found a much stronger agreement
between human explanations and SHAP than with other methods. SHAP’s improved performance for
max functions addresses the open problem of max pooling functions in DeepLIFT [7].
5.3
Explaining Class Differences
As discussed in Section 4.2, DeepLIFT’s compositional approach suggests a compositional approxi-
mation of SHAP values (Deep SHAP). These insights, in turn, improve DeepLIFT, and a new version
8
