A Uniﬁed Approach to Interpreting Model
Predictions
Scott M. Lundberg
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
slund1@cs.washington.edu
Su-In Lee
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
suinlee@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Understanding why a model makes a certain prediction can be as crucial as the
prediction’s accuracy in many applications. However, the highest accuracy for large
modern datasets is often achieved by complex models that even experts struggle to
interpret, such as ensemble or deep learning models, creating a tension between
accuracy and interpretability. In response, various methods have recently been
proposed to help users interpret the predictions of complex models, but it is often
unclear how these methods are related and when one method is preferable over
another. To address this problem, we present a uniﬁed framework for interpreting
predictions, SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations). SHAP assigns each feature
an importance value for a particular prediction. Its novel components include: (1)
the identiﬁcation of a new class of additive feature importance measures, and (2)
theoretical results showing there is a unique solution in this class with a set of
desirable properties. The new class uniﬁes six existing methods, notable because
several recent methods in the class lack the proposed desirable properties. Based
on insights from this uniﬁcation, we present new methods that show improved
computational performance and/or better consistency with human intuition than
previous approaches.
1
Introduction
The ability to correctly interpret a prediction model’s output is extremely important. It engenders
appropriate user trust, provides insight into how a model may be improved, and supports understanding
of the process being modeled. In some applications, simple models (e.g., linear models) are often
preferred for their ease of interpretation, even if they may be less accurate than complex ones.
However, the growing availability of big data has increased the beneﬁts of using complex models, so
bringing to the forefront the trade-off between accuracy and interpretability of a model’s output. A
wide variety of different methods have been recently proposed to address this issue [5, 8, 9, 3, 4, 1].
But an understanding of how these methods relate and when one method is preferable to another is
still lacking.
Here, we present a novel uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions.1 Our approach leads to
three potentially surprising results that bring clarity to the growing space of methods:
1. We introduce the perspective of viewing any explanation of a model’s prediction as a model itself,
which we term the explanation model. This lets us deﬁne the class of additive feature attribution
methods (Section 2), which uniﬁes six current methods.
1https://github.com/slundberg/shap
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
