Figure 1: SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanation) values attribute to each feature the change in the
expected model prediction when conditioning on that feature. They explain how to get from the
base value E[f(z)] that would be predicted if we did not know any features to the current output
f(x). This diagram shows a single ordering. When the model is non-linear or the input features are
not independent, however, the order in which features are added to the expectation matters, and the
SHAP values arise from averaging the φi values across all possible orderings.
8, where fx(z′) = f(hx(z′)) = E[f(z) | zS], and S is the set of non-zero indexes in z′ (Figure 1).
Based on Sections 2 and 3, SHAP values provide the unique additive feature importance measure that
adheres to Properties 1-3 and uses conditional expectations to deﬁne simpliﬁed inputs. Implicit in this
deﬁnition of SHAP values is a simpliﬁed input mapping, hx(z′) = zS, where zS has missing values
for features not in the set S. Since most models cannot handle arbitrary patterns of missing input
values, we approximate f(zS) with E[f(z) | zS]. This deﬁnition of SHAP values is designed to
closely align with the Shapley regression, Shapley sampling, and quantitative input inﬂuence feature
attributions, while also allowing for connections with LIME, DeepLIFT, and layer-wise relevance
propagation.
The exact computation of SHAP values is challenging. However, by combining insights from current
additive feature attribution methods, we can approximate them. We describe two model-agnostic
approximation methods, one that is already known (Shapley sampling values) and another that is
novel (Kernel SHAP). We also describe four model-type-speciﬁc approximation methods, two of
which are novel (Max SHAP, Deep SHAP). When using these methods, feature independence and
model linearity are two optional assumptions simplifying the computation of the expected values
(note that ¯S is the set of features not in S):
f(hx(z′)) = E[f(z) | zS]
SHAP explanation model simpliﬁed input mapping
(9)
= Ez ¯
S|zS[f(z)]
expectation over z ¯S | zS
(10)
≈Ez ¯
S[f(z)]
assume feature independence (as in [9, 5, 7, 3])
(11)
≈f([zS, E[z ¯S]]).
assume model linearity
(12)
4.1
Model-Agnostic Approximations
If we assume feature independence when approximating conditional expectations (Equation 11), as
in [9, 5, 7, 3], then SHAP values can be estimated directly using the Shapley sampling values method
[9] or equivalently the Quantitative Input Inﬂuence method [3]. These methods use a sampling
approximation of a permutation version of the classic Shapley value equations (Equation 8). Separate
sampling estimates are performed for each feature attribution. While reasonable to compute for a
small number of inputs, the Kernel SHAP method described next requires fewer evaluations of the
original model to obtain similar approximation accuracy (Section 5).
Kernel SHAP (Linear LIME + Shapley values)
Linear LIME uses a linear explanation model to locally approximate f, where local is measured in the
simpliﬁed binary input space. At ﬁrst glance, the regression formulation of LIME in Equation 2 seems
very different from the classical Shapley value formulation of Equation 8. However, since linear
LIME is an additive feature attribution method, we know the Shapley values are the only possible
solution to Equation 2 that satisﬁes Properties 1-3 – local accuracy, missingness and consistency. A
natural question to pose is whether the solution to Equation 2 recovers these values. The answer
depends on the choice of loss function L, weighting kernel πx′ and regularization term Ω. The LIME
choices for these parameters are made heuristically; using these choices, Equation 2 does not recover
the Shapley values. One consequence is that local accuracy and/or consistency are violated, which in
turn leads to unintuitive behavior in certain circumstances (see Section 5).
5
