2. We then show that game theory results guaranteeing a unique solution apply to the entire class of
additive feature attribution methods (Section 3) and propose SHAP values as a uniﬁed measure of
feature importance that various methods approximate (Section 4).
3. We propose new SHAP value estimation methods and demonstrate that they are better aligned
with human intuition as measured by user studies and more effectually discriminate among model
output classes than several existing methods (Section 5).
2
Additive Feature Attribution Methods
The best explanation of a simple model is the model itself; it perfectly represents itself and is easy to
understand. For complex models, such as ensemble methods or deep networks, we cannot use the
original model as its own best explanation because it is not easy to understand. Instead, we must use a
simpler explanation model, which we deﬁne as any interpretable approximation of the original model.
We show below that six current explanation methods from the literature all use the same explanation
model. This previously unappreciated unity has interesting implications, which we describe in later
sections.
Let f be the original prediction model to be explained and g the explanation model. Here, we focus
on local methods designed to explain a prediction f(x) based on a single input x, as proposed in
LIME [5]. Explanation models often use simpliﬁed inputs x′ that map to the original inputs through a
mapping function x = hx(x′). Local methods try to ensure g(z′) ≈f(hx(z′)) whenever z′ ≈x′.
(Note that hx(x′) = x even though x′ may contain less information than x because hx is speciﬁc to
the current input x.)
Deﬁnition 1 Additive feature attribution methods have an explanation model that is a linear
function of binary variables:
g(z′) = φ0 +
M
X
i=1
φiz′
i,
(1)
where z′ ∈{0, 1}M, M is the number of simpliﬁed input features, and φi ∈R.
Methods with explanation models matching Deﬁnition 1 attribute an effect φi to each feature, and
summing the effects of all feature attributions approximates the output f(x) of the original model.
Many current methods match Deﬁnition 1, several of which are discussed below.
2.1
LIME
The LIME method interprets individual model predictions based on locally approximating the model
around a given prediction [5]. The local linear explanation model that LIME uses adheres to Equation
1 exactly and is thus an additive feature attribution method. LIME refers to simpliﬁed inputs x′ as
“interpretable inputs,” and the mapping x = hx(x′) converts a binary vector of interpretable inputs
into the original input space. Different types of hx mappings are used for different input spaces. For
bag of words text features, hx converts a vector of 1’s or 0’s (present or not) into the original word
count if the simpliﬁed input is one, or zero if the simpliﬁed input is zero. For images, hx treats the
image as a set of super pixels; it then maps 1 to leaving the super pixel as its original value and 0
to replacing the super pixel with an average of neighboring pixels (this is meant to represent being
missing).
To ﬁnd φ, LIME minimizes the following objective function:
ξ = arg min
g∈G
L(f, g, πx′) + Ω(g).
(2)
Faithfulness of the explanation model g(z′) to the original model f(hx(z′)) is enforced through
the loss L over a set of samples in the simpliﬁed input space weighted by the local kernel πx′. Ω
penalizes the complexity of g. Since in LIME g follows Equation 1 and L is a squared loss, Equation
2 can be solved using penalized linear regression.
2
