(A)
(B)
LIME
SHAP
Human
Orig. DeepLIFT
LIME
SHAP
Human
Figure 4: Human feature impact estimates are shown as the most common explanation given among
30 (A) and 52 (B) random individuals, respectively. (A) Feature attributions for a model output value
(sickness score) of 2. The model output is 2 when fever and cough are both present, 5 when only
one of fever or cough is present, and 0 otherwise. (B) Attributions of proﬁt among three men, given
according to the maximum number of questions any man got right. The ﬁrst man got 5 questions
right, the second 4 questions, and the third got none right, so the proﬁt is $5.
Orig. DeepLift
New DeepLift
SHAP
Input
Explain 8
Explain 3
Masked
(A)
(B)
LIME
Orig. DeepLift
New DeepLift
SHAP
LIME
Change in log-odds
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 5: Explaining the output of a convolutional network trained on the MNIST digit dataset. Orig.
DeepLIFT has no explicit Shapley approximations, while New DeepLIFT seeks to better approximate
Shapley values. (A) Red areas increase the probability of that class, and blue areas decrease the
probability. Masked removes pixels in order to go from 8 to 3. (B) The change in log odds when
masking over 20 random images supports the use of better estimates of SHAP values.
includes updates to better match Shapley values [7]. Figure 5 extends DeepLIFT’s convolutional
network example to highlight the increased performance of estimates that are closer to SHAP values.
The pre-trained model and Figure 5 example are the same as those used in [7], with inputs normalized
between 0 and 1. Two convolution layers and 2 dense layers are followed by a 10-way softmax
output layer. Both DeepLIFT versions explain a normalized version of the linear layer, while SHAP
(computed using Kernel SHAP) and LIME explain the model’s output. SHAP and LIME were both
run with 50k samples (Supplementary Figure 1); to improve performance, LIME was modiﬁed to use
single pixel segmentation over the digit pixels. To match [7], we masked 20% of the pixels chosen to
switch the predicted class from 8 to 3 according to the feature attribution given by each method.
6
Conclusion
The growing tension between the accuracy and interpretability of model predictions has motivated
the development of methods that help users interpret predictions. The SHAP framework identiﬁes
the class of additive feature importance methods (which includes six previous methods) and shows
there is a unique solution in this class that adheres to desirable properties. The thread of unity that
SHAP weaves through the literature is an encouraging sign that common principles about model
interpretation can inform the development of future methods.
We presented several different estimation methods for SHAP values, along with proofs and ex-
periments showing that these values are desirable. Promising next steps involve developing faster
model-type-speciﬁc estimation methods that make fewer assumptions, integrating work on estimating
interaction effects from game theory, and deﬁning new explanation model classes.
9
