3
Simple Properties Uniquely Determine Additive Feature Attributions
A surprising attribute of the class of additive feature attribution methods is the presence of a single
unique solution in this class with three desirable properties (described below). While these properties
are familiar to the classical Shapley value estimation methods, they were previously unknown for
other additive feature attribution methods.
The ﬁrst desirable property is local accuracy. When approximating the original model f for a speciﬁc
input x, local accuracy requires the explanation model to at least match the output of f for the
simpliﬁed input x′ (which corresponds to the original input x).
Property 1 (Local accuracy)
f(x) = g(x′) = φ0 +
M
X
i=1
φix′
i
(5)
The explanation model g(x′) matches the original model f(x) when x = hx(x′), where φ0 =
f(hx(0)) represents the model output with all simpliﬁed inputs toggled off (i.e. missing).
The second property is missingness. If the simpliﬁed inputs represent feature presence, then missing-
ness requires features missing in the original input to have no impact. All of the methods described in
Section 2 obey the missingness property.
Property 2 (Missingness)
x′
i = 0 =⇒φi = 0
(6)
Missingness constrains features where x′
i = 0 to have no attributed impact.
The third property is consistency. Consistency states that if a model changes so that some simpliﬁed
input’s contribution increases or stays the same regardless of the other inputs, that input’s attribution
should not decrease.
Property 3 (Consistency) Let fx(z′) = f(hx(z′)) and z′ \ i denote setting z′
i = 0. For any two
models f and f ′, if
f ′
x(z′) −f ′
x(z′ \ i) ≥fx(z′) −fx(z′ \ i)
(7)
for all inputs z′ ∈{0, 1}M, then φi(f ′, x) ≥φi(f, x).
Theorem 1 Only one possible explanation model g follows Deﬁnition 1 and satisﬁes Properties 1, 2,
and 3:
φi(f, x) =
X
z′⊆x′
|z′|!(M −|z′| −1)!
M!
[fx(z′) −fx(z′ \ i)]
(8)
where |z′| is the number of non-zero entries in z′, and z′ ⊆x′ represents all z′ vectors where the
non-zero entries are a subset of the non-zero entries in x′.
Theorem 1 follows from combined cooperative game theory results, where the values φi are known
as Shapley values [6]. Young (1985) demonstrated that Shapley values are the only set of values
that satisfy three axioms similar to Property 1, Property 3, and a ﬁnal property that we show to be
redundant in this setting (see Supplementary Material). Property 2 is required to adapt the Shapley
proofs to the class of additive feature attribution methods.
Under Properties 1-3, for a given simpliﬁed input mapping hx, Theorem 1 shows that there is only one
possible additive feature attribution method. This result implies that methods not based on Shapley
values violate local accuracy and/or consistency (methods in Section 2 already respect missingness).
The following section proposes a uniﬁed approach that improves previous methods, preventing them
from unintentionally violating Properties 1 and 3.
4
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanation) Values
We propose SHAP values as a uniﬁed measure of feature importance. These are the Shapley values
of a conditional expectation function of the original model; thus, they are the solution to Equation
4
