Benchmarking TinyML Systems
a reliable TinyML hardware benchmark is required.
In this paper, we discuss the challenges and opportunities
associated with the development of a TinyML hardware
benchmark. Our short paper is a call to action for estab-
lishing a common benchmarking for TinyML workloads on
emerging TinyML hardware to foster the development of
TinyML applications. The points presented here reﬂect the
ongoing effort of the TinyMLPerf working group that is cur-
rently comprised of over 30 organizations and 75 members.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we discuss the application landscape of TinyML, including
the existing use cases, models, and datasets. In Section 3, we
describe the existing TinyML hardware solutions, including
outlining improvements to general-purpose MCUs and the
development of novel architectures. In Section 4, we discuss
the inherent challenges of the ﬁeld and how they complicate
the development of a benchmark. In Section 5, we describe
the existing benchmarks that relate to TinyML and identify
the deﬁciencies that still need to be ﬁlled. In Section 6 we
discuss the progress of the TinyMLPerf working group thus
far and describe the four benchmarks. In Section 7, we
concluded the paper and discuss future work.
2
TINY USE CASES, MODELS & DATASETS
In this section we attempt to summarize the ﬁeld of TinyML
by describing a set of representative use cases (Section
2.1), their relevant datasets (Section 2.2), and the model
architectures commonly applied to these speciﬁc use cases
(Section 2.3).
2.1
Use Cases
Despite the general lack of maturity within the ﬁeld, there
are a number of well established TinyML use cases. We
categorize the application landscape of tiny ML by input
type in Table 3, which in the context of TinyML systems
plays a crucial role in the use case deﬁnition.
Audio wake words is already a fairly ubiquitous example of
always-on ML inference. Audio wake words is generally a
speech classiﬁcation problem that achieves very low power
inference by limiting the label space, often to two labels:
“wake word” and “not wake word” (Zhang et al., 2017).
Anomaly detection and predictive maintenance are com-
monly deployed on MCUs in factory settings where audio,
motor bearing, or IMU data can be used to detect faults in
products or equipment.
Other deployed TinyML applications, like activity recog-
nition from IMU data (Hassan et al., 2018), rely on low
feature dimensionality to ﬁt within the tight constraints of
the platforms. Some use cases have been proven viable, but
have yet to reach end users because they are too new, like
visual wake words (Chowdhery et al., 2019).
Many traditional ML use cases can be considered futuristic
TinyML tasks. As ultra-low-power inference hardware con-
tinues to improve, the threshold of viability expands. Tasks
like large label space image classiﬁcation or object counting
are well suited for low-power always-on applications but
are currently too compute and memory hungry for today’s
TinyML hardware.
Furthermore, TinyML has a signiﬁcant role to play in future
technology. For example, many of the fundamental features
of augmented reality (AR) glasses are always-on and battery-
powered. Due to tight real time constraints, these devices
cannot afford the latency of ofﬂoading computation to the
cloud, an edge server, or even an accompanying mobile
device. Thus, due to shared constraints, AR applications can
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from progress in the ﬁeld of TinyML.
2.2
Datasets
There are a number of open-source datasets that are relevant
to TinyML usecases. Table 3 breaks them down by the
type of data. Despite the availability of these datasets, the
majority of deployed TinyML models are trained on much
larger, proprietary datasets. The open-source datasets that
are competitively large are not TinyML speciﬁc. The lack
of large, TinyML focused, open-source datasets slows the
progress of academic research and limits the ability of a
benchmark to represent real workloads accurately.
2.3
Models
Table 3 lists common model types for TinyML use cases.
Although neural networks (NN) are a dominant force in
traditional ML, it is common to use non-NN based solutions
like decision trees (Kumar et al., 2017), for some TinyML
use cases, due to their low compute and memory require-
ments.
Machine learning on MCU-class devices has only recently
become feasible; therefore, the community has yet to pro-
duce models that have become widely accepted as Mo-
bileNets have become for mobile devices. This makes the
task of selecting representative models challenging. How-
ever, immaturity also brings opportunity as our decisions
can help direct future progress. Selecting a subset of the
currently available models, outlining the rules for quality
versus accuracy trade-offs, and prescribing a measurement
methodology that can be faithfully reproduced will encour-
age the community to develop new models, runtimes, and
hardware that progressively outperform one another.
