Benchmarking TinyML Systems
Table 2. Existing Benchmarks
BENCHMARK
ML?
POWER?
TINY?
COREMARK
×
√
√
MLMARK
√
×
×
MLPERF INFERENCE
√
√
×
TINYML REQUIREMENTS
√
√
√
A benchmark suite must balance optimality with portabil-
ity, and comparibility with representativeness. A TinyML
benchmark should support many options for model deploy-
ment but the impact of that choice on the results must be
carefully evaluated.
5
RELATED WORK
There are a number of ML related hardware benchmarks,
however, none that accurately represent the performance
of TinyML workloads on tiny hardware. Table 2 shows a
sampling of the widely accepted industry benchmarks that
are directly applicable to the discussion on TinyML systems.
EEMBC CoreMark (Gal-On & Levy) has become the stan-
dard performance benchmark for MCU-class devices due
to its ease of implementation and use of real algorithms.
Yet, CoreMark does not proﬁle full programs, nor does it
accurately represent machine learning inference workloads.
EEMBC MLMark (Torelli & Bangale) addresses these is-
sues by using actual ML inference workloads. However, the
supported models are far too large for MCU-class devices
and are not representative of TinyML workloads. They re-
quire far too much memory (GBs) and have signiﬁcant run
times. Additionally, while CoreMark supports power mea-
surements with ULPMark-CM (EEMBC), MLMark does
not, which is critical for a TinyML benchmark.
MLPerf, a community-driven benchmarking effort, has
recently introduced a benchmarking suite for ML infer-
ence (Reddi et al., 2019) and has plans to add power mea-
surements.
However, much like MLMark, the current
MLPerf inference benchmark precludes MCUs and other
resource-constrained platforms due to a lack of small bench-
marks and compatible implementations.
As Table 2 summarizes, there is a clear and distinct need for
a TinyML benchmark that caters to the unique needs of ML
workloads, makes power a ﬁrst-class citizen and prescribes
a methodology that suits TinyML.
6
BENCHMARKS
To overcome theses challenges, we adopt a set of principles
for the development of a robust TinyML benchmarking suite
and select a set of 4 benchmarks.
6.1
Open and Closed Divisions
As previously stated, TinyML is a diverse ﬁeld, therefore
not all systems can be accommodated under strict rules,
however, without strict rules, direct comparison of the hard-
ware becomes more difﬁcult. To address this issue, we
adopt MLPerf’s open and closed structure. More traditional
TinyML solutions can submit to the closed division where
submissions must use a model that is considered equivalent
to the reference model. TinyML systems that fall outside
the bounds of the ”closed” benchmark can submit results to
the open division which will allow submissions to deviate
as necessary from the closed reference. We believe this
structure increases the inclusivity of the bechmarking suite
while maintaining the comparability of the results.
Additionally, the open division allows for submissions to
demonstrate novel software optimizations. Software based
organizations can submit results using the reference plat-
form while altering the model or inference engine to demon-
strate the relative advantage of their unique solutions.
6.2
Use Cases
Our use case selection process prioritized diversity, fea-
sibility, and industry relevance. Diversity to ensure our
benchmark suite covered as much of the ﬁeld as possible,
feasibility in terms of access to open source datasets and
models, and relevance to real world applications.
The group has selected four use cases to target: audio
wake words, visual wake words, image classiﬁcation, and
anomaly detection. Audio wake words refers to the com-
mon, keyword spotting task (e.g. “Alexa”, “Ok Google”,
and “Hey Siri”). Visual wake words is a binary image classi-
ﬁcation task that indicates if a person is visible in the image
or not. The image classiﬁcation use cases targets small label
set size image classiﬁcation. Anomaly detection is a broader
use case that classiﬁes time series data as “normal” or “ab-
normal”. We speciﬁcally select audio anomaly detection as
our use case due to the availability of a relevant dataset.
These use cases have been selected to represent the broad
range of TinyML. They encompass three distinct input data
types and range from relatively resource hungry (visual
wake words) to light weight (anomaly detection). Further-
more the models traditionally used for these use cases are
varied therefore the benchmarking suite can support a di-
verse set of ML techniques.
6.3
Dataset Selection
The group has selected a dataset for each use case, as shown
in Table 3. The datasets help specify the use cases, are used
to train the reference models, and are sampled to create the
tests sets used during the measurement on device. Further-
