Benchmarking TinyML Systems
bility of these platforms.
Although general-purpose MCUs provide ﬂexibility, the
highest TinyML performance efﬁciency comes from special-
ized hardware. Novel architectures can achieve performance
in the range of one micro Joule per inference (Holleman,
2019). These specialized devices expand the boundaries of
ML to the ultra low power end of TinyML processors.
4
CHALLENGES
TinyML systems present a number of unique challenges to
the design of a performance benchmark that can be used
to measure and quantify performance differences between
various systems systematically. We discuss the four primary
obstacles and postulate how they might be overcome.
4.1
Low Power
Low power consumption is one of the deﬁning features of
TinyML systems. Therefore, a useful benchmark should
ostensibly proﬁle the energy efﬁciency of each device. How-
ever, there are many challenges in fairly measuring energy
consumption. Firstly, as illustrated in Figure 1, TinyML
devices can consume drastically different amounts of power,
which makes maintaining accuracy across the range of de-
vices difﬁcult.
Secondly, determining what falls under the scope of the
power measurement is difﬁcult to determine when data paths
and pre-processing steps can vary signiﬁcantly between
devices. Other factors like chip peripherals and underlying
ﬁrmware can impact the measurements. Unlike traditional
high-power ML systems, TinyML systems do not have spare
cores to load the System-Under-Test (SUT) with minimal
overheads.
4.2
Limited Memory
Due to their small size, TinyML systems often have tight
memory constraints. While traditional ML systems like
smartphones cope with resource constraints in the order
of a few GBs, tinyML systems are typically coping with
resources that are two orders of magnitude smaller.
Memory is one of the primary motivating factors for the
creation of a TinyML speciﬁc benchmark.
Traditional
ML benchmarks use inference models that have drastically
higher peak memory requirements (in the order of gigabytes)
than TinyML devices can provide. This also complicates
the deployment of a benchmarking suite as any overhead
can signiﬁcantly impact power consumption or even make
the benchmark too big to ﬁt. Individual benchmarks must
also cover a wide range of devices; therefore, multiple levels
of quantization and precision should be represented in the
benchmarking suite. Finally, a variety of benchmarks should
be chosen such that the diversity of the ﬁeld is supported.
4.3
Hardware Heterogeneity
Despite its nascency, TinyML systems are already diverse
in their performance, power, and capabilities. Devices range
from general-purpose MCUs to novel architectures, like
in event-based neural processors (Brainchip) or memory
compute (Kim et al., 2019). This heterogeneity poses a
number of challenges as the system under test (SUT) will
not necessarily include otherwise standard features, like
a system clock or debug interface. Furthermore, the task
of normalizing performance results across heterogeneous
implementations is a key challenge.
Today’s state-of-the-art benchmarks are not designed to han-
dle the challenges readily. They need careful re-engineering
to be ﬂexible enough to handle the extent of hardware het-
erogeneity that is commonplace in the TinyML ecosystem.
4.4
Software Heterogeneity
There are three distinct methods for model deployment on
to TinyML systems: hand coding, code generation, and ML
interpreters.
Hand coding often produces the best results as it allows for
low-level, application speciﬁc optimizations; however, the
task is time consuming and the impact of the optimizations
are often opaque to anyone but the original design team.
Moreover, hand coding limits the ability to share knowledge
and adopt new methods, which is detrimental to the rate
of progress in TinyML. From a benchmarking perspective,
hand coded submission will likely produce the best numeri-
cal results at the cost of reproducibility, comparability and
time.
Code generation methods produce well optimized code with-
out the signiﬁcant effort of hand coding by abstracting and
automating system level optimizations. However, code gen-
eration does not address the issues with comparability, as
each major vendor has their own set of proprietary tools and
compilers, which also makes portability a challenge.
ML interpreters allow for signiﬁcant portability as their
abstract structure is the same across platforms. TensorFlow
Lite for Microcontrollers, a popular ML framework for
TinyML, uses an interpreter to call individual kernels, like
convolution, during run time. The framework is independent
of the model architecture, therefore new models can be
easily swapped in. Additionally, the reference kernels can
be individually optimised and changed to ﬁt the platform.
This method comes with a small overhead in binary size
and performance. From a benchmarking perspective, this
abstraction separates the impact of the model architecture
on the system level performance, which makes results more
generalizable.
