BENCHMARKING TINYML SYSTEMS: CHALLENGES AND DIRECTION
Colby R. Banbury 1 Vijay Janapa Reddi 1 Max Lam 1 William Fu 1 Amin Fazel 2 Jeremy Holleman 3 4
Xinyuan Huang 5 Robert Hurtado 6 David Kanter 7 Anton Lokhmotov 8 David Patterson 9 10 Danilo Pau 11
Jae-sun Seo 12 Jeff Sieracki 13 Urmish Thakker 14 Marian Verhelst 15 16 Poonam Yadav 17
ABSTRACT
Recent advancements in ultra-low-power machine learning (TinyML) hardware promises to unlock an entirely new
class of smart applications. However, continued progress is limited by the lack of a widely accepted benchmark
for these systems. Benchmarking allows us to measure and thereby systematically compare, evaluate, and improve
the performance of systems and is therefore fundamental to a ﬁeld reaching maturity. In this position paper, we
present the current landscape of TinyML and discuss the challenges and direction towards developing a fair and
useful hardware benchmark for TinyML workloads. Furthermore, we present our four benchmarks and discuss
our selection methodology. Our viewpoints reﬂect the collective thoughts of the TinyMLPerf working group that
is comprised of over 30 organizations.
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) inference on the edge is an increas-
ingly attractive prospect due to its potential for increasing
energy efﬁciency (Fedorov et al., 2019), privacy, responsive-
ness (Zhang et al., 2017), and autonomy of edge devices.
Thus far, the ﬁeld edge ML has predominately focused on
mobile inference which has led to numerous advancements
in machine learning models such as exploiting pruning, spar-
sity, and quantization. But in recent years, there have major
been strides in expanding the scope of edge systems. In-
terest is brewing in both academia (Fedorov et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2017) and industry (Flamand et al., 2018; War-
den, 2018a) towards expanding the scope of edge ML to
microcontroller-class devices.
The goal of “TinyML” (tinyML Foundation, 2019) is to
bring ML inference to ultra-low-power devices, typically un-
der a milliWatt, and thereby break the traditional power bar-
rier preventing widely distributed machine intelligence. By
performing inference on-device, and near-sensor, TinyML
enables greater responsiveness and privacy while avoiding
the energy cost associated with wireless communication,
which at this scale is far higher than that of compute (War-
1Harvard University 2Samsung Semiconductor, Inc. 3Syntiant
4University of North Carolina,
Charlotte
5Cisco Systems
6California State Polytechnic University, Pomona 7Real World
Insights 8dividiti 9University of California, Berkeley 10Google
11STMicroelectronics, Italy 12Arizona State University 13Reality
AI 14Arm ML Research Lab 15KU Leuven 16Interuniversity Micro-
electronics Centre (IMEC) 17University of York. Correspondence
to: Colby R. Banbury <cbanbury@g.harvard.edu>.
Copyright 2020 by the authors.
den, 2018b). Furthermore, the efﬁciency of TinyML enables
a class of smart, battery-powered, always-on applications
that can revolutionize the real-time collection and process-
ing of data. This emerging ﬁeld, which is the culmination
of many innovations, is poised only further to accelerate its
growth in the coming years.
To unlock the full potential of the ﬁeld, hardware software
co-design is required. Speciﬁcally, TinyML models must
be small enough to ﬁt within the tight constraints of MCU-
class devices (e.g., a few hundred kB of memory and limited
onboard compute horsepower in the order of MHz proces-
sor clock speed), thus limiting the size of the input and the
number of layers (Zhang et al., 2017) or necessitating the
use lightweight, non-neural network-based techniques (Ku-
mar et al., 2017). TinyML tools are broadly deﬁned as
anything that enables the design, mapping, and deployment
of TinyML algorithms including aggressive quantization
techniques (Wang et al., 2019), memory aware neural archi-
tecture searches (Fedorov et al., 2019), frameworks (Ten-
sorFlow), and efﬁcient inference libraries (Lai et al., 2018;
Garofalo et al., 2019). Efforts in TinyML hardware in-
clude improving inference on the next generation of general-
purpose MCUs (arm; Flamand et al., 2018), developing
hardware specialized for low power inference, and creating
novel architectures intended only as inference engines for
speciﬁc tasks (Moons et al., 2018).
The complexity and dynamicity of the ﬁeld obscure the mea-
surement of progress and make dynamism design decisions
intractable. In order to enable the continued innovation, a
fair and reliable method of comparison is needed. Since
progress is often the result of increased hardware capability,
arXiv:2003.04821v4  [cs.PF]  29 Jan 2021
