Sensors 2026, 26, 356
11 of 22
model classifies traffic instances as benign or anomalous and even performs fine-grained
classification, enabling near real-time detection with minimal computational overhead.
The overall workflow is summarized by two core processes. Algorithm 2 depicts the
training process of the BERT model at the edge level. In this phase, the model learns to
classify various types of attacks while concurrently learning to represent network flows
in a high-dimensional space. Algorithm 3 outlines the lightweight model inference at the
IoT level. Here, instead of processing raw network flows directly, which can be compu-
tationally intensive due to the feature learning phase, the model requests the embedding
representation of these flows from the EdgeBERT model. It then trains a Feed-Forward
Neural Network (FFNN) on these rich semantic embeddings. Finally, the model classifies
traffic as anomalous by comparing the output probability of the classification head with a
threshold τ (typically set to 0.5 for binary classification).
Algorithm 2 Edge-Level BERT Model Training and Embedding Generation
Input: Dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 of network traffic samples
Output: Trained BERT model MBERT
1: Initialize BERT-base model MBERT with pre-trained weights
2: for each mini-batch (xb, yb) in D do
3:
xb into input sequence sb
▷Tokenize and encode
4:
hb = MBERT(sb)
▷Compute hidden representations
5:
ˆyb = f (hb)
▷Compute classification output
6:
L = CrossEntropy( ˆyb, yb)
▷Compute the loss
7:
Update MBERT parameters via backpropagation
8: end for
9: Freeze the trained model parameters
10: return MBERT
Algorithm 3 IoT-Level Lightweight Neural Network Inference
Input: Compact neural network MIoT
Input: Incoming IoT traffic sample xi
Output: Predicted class label ˆyi ∈[0, 1]
1: ei = MBERT(xi)
▷Embeddings request, processing and transmission
2: ˆyi = MIoT(ei)
▷Compute prediction score
3: if ˆyi ≥τ then
4:
Classify traffic as anomalous
5: else
6:
Classify traffic as benign
7: end if
8: return ˆyi
4.2. Compression in SEED
Given the large size and computational demands of LLMs, compression techniques
are vital to making them compatible with IoT constraints. These techniques reduce memory
usage and inference latency while maintaining acceptable performance.
Quantization
Quantization involves reducing the numerical precision of model weights, which
are typically represented in 32-bit floating-point (FP32) format. By converting weights
to lower-precision formats such as 8-bit integers (int8) or 4-bit (int4), quantization can
reduce model size by a factor of four to eight [11]. This results in lower memory and
energy consumption during inference. However, this compression may introduce minor
degradation in model accuracy due to reduced precision, particularly in sensitive layers.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356
