Sensors 2026, 26, 356
10 of 22
ployment on IoT devices impractical, as such environments typically lack the necessary
resources (e.g., GPUs) for large-scale model training and inference.
To address these limitations, we propose a collaborative Edge-to-IoT learning scheme,
referred to as SEED, in which a Transformer-based model is trained at the edge layer, while
a compact neural network is deployed at the IoT layer. Compared to IoT devices, edge
nodes offer significantly greater computational resources, enabling the training of a BERT-
based intrusion detection model capable of learning rich and generalized representations
of network traffic patterns across multiple attack types.
Since networks generate unstructured and vast amoung of data that make it difficult
to extract direct insights [26], the edge-level model encodes network traffic in a high-
dimensional embedding space, thus capturing complex semantic relationships between
packet-level features. As stated earlier, raw network data are not directly exploitable
by transformer-based models. To overcome this limitation, Algorithm 1 converts the
network dataset into a textual representation by concatenating each feature name with
its corresponding feature value, separated by a predefined marker (“$” in our case). This
process is applied uniformly across the entire dataset.
Algorithm 1 Data preprocessing: feature-wise textual serialization
Input: Dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1
Input: Feature set F
▷selected features to encode
Input: Hash function H(·)
▷privacy-preserving fixed-length encoder
Output: Serialized corpus S = {si}N
i=1
1: Initialize S ←[ ]
2: for (xi, yi) ∈D do
3:
Initialize token list Ti ←[ ]
4:
for f ∈F do
5:
v ←xi[ f ]
▷value of feature f in sample xi
6:
t ←H( f ∥$ ∥toString(v))
7:
Append t to Ti
8:
end for
9:
si ←join(Ti, ””)
▷space-separated token sequence
10:
Append si to S
11: end for
12: return S
Once the textual corpus is constructed, a new vocabulary of size 32,522 (corresponding
to the default BERT vocabulary size) is learned from scratch based on this newly formed
context. Consequently, the model is trained exclusively on this domain-specific vocabulary,
allowing it to learn deep semantic representations tailored to network traffic data. Unlike
the approach in [27], our method does not rely on dataset matching. Instead, the proposed
preprocessing strategy can be applied to multiple heterogeneous datasets (e.g., IoT traffic
and traditional network traffic), enabling the construction of a broader contextual space to
enable a more flexible and generalizable intrusion detection system.
The key idea is to exploit these embeddings to bridge the performance–efficiency gap
between edge and IoT. Once trained, the edge model generates embeddings for incoming
IoT traffic and transmits them to the IoT level, where a lightweight neural network processes
the embedding vectors instead of raw packet features. In our framework, we use the
condensed representation produced by BERT as the embedding of each network traffic
sample (processed as batch of size Bsize), specifically the hidden state associated with the
[CLS] token from the final encoder layer due to its compactness. Our confirmation outputs
an embedding vector with a fixed-length of dimension 256, which serves as a global, context-
aware representation of the entire input sequence. The inference performed by the IoT-side
https://doi.org/10.3390/s26020356
