Curriculum Learning
Yoshua Bengio1
Yoshua.Bengio@umontreal.ca
J´erˆome Louradour1,2
jeromelouradour@gmail.com
Ronan Collobert3
ronan@collobert.com
Jason Weston3
jasonw@nec-labs.com
(1) U. Montreal, P.O. Box 6128, Montreal, Canada (2) A2iA SA, 40bis Fabert, Paris, France
(3) NEC Laboratories America, 4 Independence Way, Princeton, NJ, USA
Abstract
Humans and animals learn much better when
the examples are not randomly presented but
organized in a meaningful order which illus-
trates gradually more concepts, and gradu-
ally more complex ones.
Here, we formal-
ize such training strategies in the context
of machine learning, and call them “curricu-
lum learning”. In the context of recent re-
search studying the diﬃculty of training in
the presence of non-convex training criteria
(for deep deterministic and stochastic neu-
ral networks), we explore curriculum learn-
ing in various set-ups. The experiments show
that signiﬁcant improvements in generaliza-
tion can be achieved. We hypothesize that
curriculum learning has both an eﬀect on the
speed of convergence of the training process
to a minimum and, in the case of non-convex
criteria, on the quality of the local minima
obtained: curriculum learning can be seen
as a particular form of continuation method
(a general strategy for global optimization of
non-convex functions).
1. Introduction
Humans need about two decades to be trained as
fully functional adults of our society. That training
is highly organized, based on an education system and
a curriculum which introduces diﬀerent concepts at
diﬀerent times, exploiting previously learned concepts
to ease the learning of new abstractions. By choos-
ing which examples to present and in which order to
present them to the learning system, one can guide
Appearing in Proceedings of the 26 th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Montreal, Canada, 2009. Copy-
right 2009 by the author(s)/owner(s).
training and remarkably increase the speed at which
learning can occur. This idea is routinely exploited in
animal training where it is called shaping (Skinner,
1958; Peterson, 2004; Krueger & Dayan, 2009).
Previous research (Elman, 1993; Rohde & Plaut, 1999;
Krueger & Dayan, 2009) at the intersection of cogni-
tive science and machine learning has raised the follow-
ing question: can machine learning algorithms beneﬁt
from a similar training strategy? The idea of training a
learning machine with a curriculum can be traced back
at least to Elman (1993). The basic idea is to start
small, learn easier aspects of the task or easier sub-
tasks, and then gradually increase the diﬃculty level.
The experimental results, based on learning a simple
grammar with a recurrent network (Elman, 1993), sug-
gested that successful learning of grammatical struc-
ture depends, not on innate knowledge of grammar,
but on starting with a limited architecture that is at
ﬁrst quite restricted in complexity, but then expands
its resources gradually as it learns. Such conclusions
are important for developmental psychology, because
they illustrate the adaptive value of starting, as hu-
man infants do, with a simpler initial state, and then
building on that to develop more and more sophis-
ticated representations of structure.
Elman (1993)
makes the statement that this strategy could make
it possible for humans to learn what might otherwise
prove to be unlearnable. However, these conclusions
have been seriously questioned in Rohde and Plaut
(1999). The question of guiding learning of a recurrent
neural network for learning a simple language and in-
creasing its capacity along the way was recently revis-
ited from the cognitive perspective (Krueger & Dayan,
2009), providing evidence for faster convergence using
a shaping procedure. Similar ideas were also explored
in robotics (Sanger, 1994), by gradually making the
learning task more diﬃcult.
We want to clarify when and why a curriculum or
