Curriculum Learning
“starting small” strategy can beneﬁt machine learning
algorithms. We contribute to this question by show-
ing several cases - involving vision and language tasks -
in which very simple multi-stage curriculum strategies
give rise to improved generalization and faster con-
vergence. We also contribute to this question with the
introduction of a hypothesis which may help to explain
some of the advantages of a curriculum strategy. This
hypothesis is essentially that a well chosen curriculum
strategy can act as a continuation method (Allgower &
Georg, 1980), i.e., can help to ﬁnd better local minima
of a non-convex training criterion. In addition, the ex-
periments reported here suggest that (like other strate-
gies recently proposed to train deep deterministic or
stochastic neural networks) the curriculum strategies
appear on the surface to operate like a regularizer, i.e.,
their beneﬁcial eﬀect is most pronounced on the test
set. Furthermore, experiments on convex criteria also
show that a curriculum strategy can speed the conver-
gence of training towards the global minimum.
2. On the diﬃcult optimization
problem of training deep neural
networks
To test the hypothesis that a curriculum strategy could
help to ﬁnd better local minima of a highly non-convex
criterion, we turn our attention to training of deep ar-
chitectures, which have been shown to involve good
solutions in local minima that are almost impossible
to ﬁnd by random initialization (Erhan et al., 2009).
Deep learning methods attempt to learn feature hi-
erarchies.
Features at higher levels are formed by
the composition of lower level features.
Automati-
cally learning multiple levels of abstraction may al-
low a system to induce complex functions mapping
the input to the output directly from data, without
depending heavily on human-crafted features. A the-
oretical motivation for deep architectures comes from
complexity theory: some functions can be represented
compactly with an architecture of depth k, but re-
quire an exponential size architecture when the depth
is restricted to be less than k (H˚astad & Goldmann,
1991; Bengio, 2009).
However, training deep archi-
tectures involves a potentially intractable non-convex
optimization problem (Bengio, 2009), which compli-
cates their analysis. There were no good algorithms
for training fully-connected deep architectures before
2006, when Hinton et al. (2006) introduced a learn-
ing algorithm that greedily trains one layer at a time.
It exploits an unsupervised generative learning algo-
rithm for each layer: a Restricted Boltzmann Machine
(RBM) (Freund & Haussler, 1994). It is conceivable
that by training each layer one after the other, one
ﬁrst learns the simpler concepts (represented in the
ﬁrst layer), then slightly more abstract concepts (rep-
resented in the second layer), etc. Shortly after, strate-
gies for building deep architectures from related vari-
ants were proposed (Ranzato et al., 2007; Bengio et al.,
2007). These works showed the advantage of deep ar-
chitectures over shallow ones and of the unsupervised
pre-training strategy in a variety of settings. Deep ar-
chitectures have been applied with success not only in
classiﬁcation tasks (Ranzato et al., 2007; Bengio et al.,
2007; Larochelle et al., 2007; Ranzato et al., 2008; Vin-
cent et al., 2008), but also in regression (Salakhutdi-
nov & Hinton, 2008), dimensionality reduction (Hin-
ton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Salakhutdinov & Hinton,
2007), natural language processing (Collobert & We-
ston, 2008; Weston et al., 2008), and collaborative ﬁl-
tering (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007).
Nonetheless, training deep architectures is a diﬃcult
problem.
Erhan et al.
(2009) and Larochelle et al.
(2007) studied this question experimentally to clarify
why deeper networks can sometimes generalize much
better and why some strategies such as unsupervised
pre-training can make this possible.
Erhan et al.
(2009) found that unsupervised pre-training makes it
possible to start the supervised optimization in a re-
gion of parameter space corresponding to solutions
that were not much better in terms of ﬁnal training er-
ror but substantially better in terms of test error. This
suggested a dual eﬀect of unsupervised pre-training,
both in terms of helping optimization (starting in bet-
ter basins of attraction of the descent procedure in
parameter space) and as a kind of regularizer.
The experiments presented here suggest that pre-
training with a curriculum strategy might act similarly
to unsupervised pre-training, acting both as a way to
ﬁnd better local minima and as a regularizer. They
also suggest that they help to reach faster convergence
to a minimum of the training criterion.
3. A curriculum as a continuation
method
Continuation methods (Allgower & Georg, 1980) are
optimization strategies for dealing with minimizing
non-convex criteria. Although these global optimiza-
tion methods provide no guarantee that the global
optimum will be obtained, they have been particu-
larly useful in computational chemistry to ﬁnd approx-
imate solutions of diﬃcult optimization problems in-
volving the conﬁgurations of molecules (Coleman &
Wu, 1994; Wu, 1997). The basic idea is to ﬁrst opti-
mize a smoothed objective and gradually consider less
smoothing, with the intuition that a smooth version
