Curriculum Learning
distribution with the curriculum strategy crosses the
error of the no-curriculum strategy after about 1 bil-
lion updates, shortly after switching to the target vo-
cabulary size of 20,000 words, and the diﬀerence keeps
increasing afterwards. The ﬁnal test set average log-
ranks are 2.78 and 2.83 respectively, and the diﬀerence
is statistically signiﬁcant.
7. Discussion and Future Work
We started with the following question left from previ-
ous cognitive science research (Elman, 1993; Rohde &
Plaut, 1999): can machine learning algorithms ben-
eﬁt from a curriculum strategy?
Our experimental
results in many diﬀerent settings bring evidence to-
wards a positive answer to that question. It is plausi-
ble that some curriculum strategies work better than
others, that some are actually useless for some tasks
(as in Rohde and Plaut (1999)), and that better re-
sults could be obtained on our data sets with more
appropriate curriculum strategies. After all, the art of
teaching is diﬃcult and humans do not agree among
themselves about the order in which concepts should
be introduced to pupils.
From the machine learning point of view, once the
success of some curriculum strategies has been estab-
lished, the important questions are: why? and how?
This is important to help us devise better curriculum
strategies and automate that process to some extent.
We proposed a number of hypotheses to explain the
potential advantages of a curriculum strategy:
• faster training in the online setting (i.e.
faster
both from an optimization and statistical point of
view) because the learner wastes less time with
noisy or harder to predict examples (when it is
not ready to incorporate them),
• guiding training towards better regions in param-
eter space, i.e.
into basins of attraction (local
minima) of the descent procedure associated with
better generalization: a curriculum can be seen as
a particular continuation method.
Faster convergence with a curriculum was already ob-
served in (Krueger & Dayan, 2009). However, unlike
in our experiments where capacity is ﬁxed throughout
the curriculum, they found that compared to using
no curriculum, worse results were obtained with ﬁxed
neural resources. The reasons for these diﬀerences re-
main to be clariﬁed. In both cases, though, an appro-
priate curriculum strategy acts to help the training
process (faster convergence to better solutions), and
we even ﬁnd that it regularizes, giving rise to lower
generalization error for the same training error. This
is like in the case of unsupervised pre-training (Erhan
et al., 2009), and again it remains to be clariﬁed why
one would expect improved generalization, for both
curriculum and unsupervised pre-training procedures.
The way we have deﬁned curriculum strategies leaves
a lot to be deﬁned by the teacher. It would be nice
to understand general principles that make some cur-
riculum strategies work better than others, and this
clearly should be the subject of future work on curricu-
lum learning. In particular, to reap the advantages of
a curriculum strategy while minimizing the amount of
human (teacher) eﬀort involved, it is natural to con-
sider a form of active selection of examples similar to
what humans (and in particular children) do. At any
point during the “education” of a learner, some exam-
ples can be considered “too easy” (not helping much
to improve the current model), while some examples
can be considered “too diﬃcult” (no small change in
the model would allow to capture these examples). It
would be advantageous for a learner to focus on “in-
teresting” examples, which would be standing near the
frontier of the learner’s knowledge and abilities, nei-
ther too easy nor too hard. Such an approach could be
used to at least automate the pace at which a learner
would move along a predeﬁned curriculum. In the ex-
periments we performed, that pace was ﬁxed arbitrar-
ily. This kind of strategy is clearly connected to active
learning (Cohn et al., 1995), but with a view that is
diﬀerent from the standard one: instead of focusing on
the examples near the decision surface to quickly infer
its location, we think of the set of examples that the
learner succeeds to capture and gradually expand that
set by preferentially adding examples near its border.
Curriculum learning is related to boosting algorithms,
in that diﬃcult examples are gradually emphasized.
However, a curriculum starts with a focus on the eas-
ier examples, rather than a uniform distribution over
the training set. Furthermore, from the point of view
of the boosted weighted sum of weak learners, there is
no change in the training criterion: the change is only
from the point of view of the next weak learner. As
far as the boosted sum is concerned, we are following a
functional gradient on the same training criterion (the
sum of exponentiated margins). Curriculum strategies
are also connected to transfer (or multi-task) learning
and lifelong learning (Thrun, 1996). Curriculum learn-
ing strategies can be seen as a special form of trans-
fer learning where the initial tasks are used to guide
the learner so that it will perform better on the ﬁnal
task.
Whereas the traditional motivation for multi-
task learning is to improve generalization by sharing
across tasks, curriculum learning adds the notion of
guiding the optimization process, either to converge
faster, or more importantly, to guide the learner to-
wards better local minima.
