Curriculum Learning
tic gradient descent on the negative conditional log-
likelihood, i.e., a task which is known to involve a dif-
ﬁcult non-convex optimization problem (Erhan et al.,
2009). An epoch is a stochastic gradient descent pass
through a training set of 10 000 examples. The cur-
riculum consists in a 2-step schedule:
1. Perform gradient descent on the BasicShapes
training set, until “switch epoch” is reached.
2. Then perform gradient descent on the GeomShapes
training set.
Generalization
error
is
always
evaluted
on
the
GeomShapes test set.
The baseline corresponds to
training the network only on the GeomShapes train-
ing set (for the same number of training epochs),
and corresponds to “switch epoch”=0.
In our ex-
periments, there is a total of 10 000 examples in
both training sets, and 5 000 examples for valida-
tion, 5 000 for testing.
All datasets are available at
www.iro.umontreal.ca/∼lisa/ptwiki/BabyAIShapesDatasets
The hyper-parameters are the following: learning rate
of stochastic gradient descent and number of hidden
units.
The selection of hyper-parameters is simpli-
ﬁed using the following heuristic: all hyper-parameters
were chosen so as to have the best baseline perfor-
mance on the GeomShapes validation set without cur-
riculum. These hyper-parameter values are then used
for the curriculum experiments.
Figure (3) shows the distribution of test errors over
20 diﬀerent random seeds, for diﬀerent values of the
“switch epoch”: 0 (the baseline with no curriculum)
and the powers of 2 until 128. After switching to the
target training distribution, training continues either
until 256 epochs or until validation set error reaches
a minimum (early stopping).
The ﬁgure shows the
distribution of test error (after early stopping) as a
function of the “switch epoch”. Clearly, the best gen-
eralization is obtained by doing a 2-stage curriculum
where the ﬁrst half of the total allowed training time
(of 256 epochs) is spent on the easier examples rather
than on the target examples.
One potential issue with this experiment is that the
curriculum-trained model overall saw more examples
than the no-curriculum examples, although in the sec-
ond part of training (with the target distribution) both
types of models converge (in the sense of early stop-
ping) to a local minimum with respect to the error on
the target training distribution, suggesting that diﬀer-
ent local minima are obtained. Note also that the easy
examples have less variability than the hard examples
(only a subset of the shape variations are shown, e.g.
only squares instead of all kinds of rectangles).
To
|
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.21
switch epoch
Figure 3. Box plot of test classiﬁcation error distribution
as a function of the “switch epoch”, with a 3-hidden-
layers neural network trained by stochastic gradient de-
scent. Each box corresponds to 20 seeds for initializing the
parameters. The horizontal line inside the box represents
the median (50th percentile), the borders of the box the
25th and the 75th percentile and the ends of the bars the
5th and 95th percentiles.
eliminate the explanation that better results are ob-
tained with the curriculum because of seeing more ex-
amples, we trained a no-curriculum model with the
union of the BasicShapes and GeomShapes training sets,
with a ﬁnal test error still signiﬁcantly worse than
with the curriculum (with errors similar to “switch
epoch”=16). We also veriﬁed that training only with
BasicShapes yielded poor results.
6. Experiments on language modeling
We are interested here in training a language model,
predicting the best word which can follow a given con-
text of words in a correct English sentence. Follow-
ing Collobert and Weston (2008) we only try to com-
pute a score for the next word that will have a large
rank compared to the scores of other words, and we
compute the score with the architecture of Figure 4.
Whereas other language models prior to Collobert and
Weston (2008) optimized the log-likelihood of the next
word, the ranking approach does not require com-
puting the score over all the vocabulary words dur-
ing training, as shown below. Instead it is enough to
sample a negative example. In Collobert and Weston
(2008), the main objective is to learn an embedding
for the words as a side-eﬀect of learning to compute
this score. The authors showed how to use these em-
beddings in several language modeling tasks, in a form
of multi-task learning, yielding improved results.
Given any ﬁxed size window of text s, we consider a
language model f(s) which produces a score for these
windows of text. We want the score of a correct win-
dow of text s to be larger, with a margin of 1, than any
other word sequence sw where the last word has been
replaced by another word w of the vocabulary. This
corresponds to minimizing the expected value of the
