Curriculum Learning
of the problem reveals the global picture. One deﬁnes
a single-parameter family of cost functions Cλ(θ) such
that C0 can be optimized easily (maybe convex in θ),
while C1 is the criterion that we actually wish to mini-
mize. One ﬁrst minimizes C0(θ) and then gradually in-
creases λ while keeping θ at a local minimum of Cλ(θ).
Typically C0 is a highly smoothed version of C1, so
that θ gradually moves into the basin of attraction of
a dominant (if not global) minimum of C1. Applying
a continuation method to the problem of minimizing
a training criterion involves a sequence of training cri-
teria, starting from one that is easier to optimize, and
ending with the training criterion of interest.
At an abstract level, a curriculum can also be seen
as a sequence of training criteria. Each training crite-
rion in the sequence is associated with a diﬀerent set of
weights on the training examples, or more generally, on
a reweighting of the training distribution. Initially, the
weights favor “easier” examples, or examples illustrat-
ing the simplest concepts, that can be learned most
easily.
The next training criterion involves a slight
change in the weighting of examples that increases the
probability of sampling slightly more diﬃcult exam-
ples. At the end of the sequence, the reweighting of
the examples is uniform and we train on the target
training set or the target training distribution.
One way to formalize this idea is the following. Let z
be a random variable representing an example for the
learner (possibly an (x, y) pair for supervised learn-
ing). Let P(z) be the target training distribution from
which the learner should ultimately learn a function of
interest. Let 0 ≤Wλ(z) ≤1 be the weight applied to
example z at step λ in the curriculum sequence, with
0 ≤λ ≤1, and W1(z) = 1. The corresponding train-
ing distribution at step λ is
Qλ(z) ∝Wλ(z)P(z)
∀z
(1)
such that
R
Qλ(z)dz = 1. Then we have
Q1(z) = P(z)
∀z.
(2)
Consider a monotonically increasing sequence of λ val-
ues, starting from λ = 0 and ending at λ = 1.
Deﬁnition We call the corresponding sequence of dis-
tributions Qλ (following eqns 1 and 2) a curriculum
if the entropy of these distributions increases
H(Qλ) < H(Qλ+ϵ)
∀ϵ > 0
(3)
and Wλ(z) is monotonically increasing in λ, i.e.,
Wλ+ϵ(z) ≥Wλ(z)
∀z, ∀ϵ > 0.
(4)
To illustrate this deﬁnition, consider the simple set-
ting where Qλ is concentrated on a ﬁnite set of ex-
amples, and increasing λ means adding new examples
to that set: the support of Qλ increases with λ, and
the sequence of training distributions corresponds to
a sequence of embedded training sets, starting with a
small set of easy examples and ending with the target
training set. We want the entropy to increase so as
to increase the diversity of training examples, and we
want the weights of particular examples to increase as
they get “added” into the training set.
In the experiments below the sequence of training sets
is always discrete.
In fact the curriculum strategy
worked in some of our experiments with a sequence
of just two steps: ﬁrst a set of easy examples, and
then the target training set.
At the other extreme,
if training proceeds in a stochastic manner by sam-
pling training examples from a distribution, then one
could imagine a continuous sequence of sampling dis-
tributions which gradually gives more weight Wλ(z) to
the more diﬃcult examples, until all examples have an
equal weight of 1.
Up to now we have not deﬁned what “easy examples”
meant, or equivalently, how to sort examples into a
sequence that illustrates the simpler concepts ﬁrst. In
the following experiments we explore a few simple ways
to deﬁne a curriculum, but clearly a lot more work is
needed to explore diﬀerent curriculum strategies, some
of which may be very speciﬁc to particular tasks.
4. Toy Experiments with a Convex
Criterion
4.1. Cleaner Examples May Yield Better
Generalization Faster
One simple way in which easy examples could help is
by being less “noisy”, as shown theoretically (Der´enyi
et al., 1994) in the case of a Teacher-Learner pair
of Perceptrons.
In the supervised classiﬁcation set-
ting, an example is considered noisy if it falls on the
incorrect side of the decision surface of the Bayes
classiﬁer.
Noisy examples can slow down conver-
gence, as illustrated with the following toy experiment.
Two-dimensional inputs are generated from a diﬀer-
ent Gaussian for each one of the two classes. We de-
ﬁne class targets y = 1 and y = −1 respectively. The
Gaussian mean for class y is at (y/
√
2, y/
√
2) and both
Gaussians have standard deviation 1. Starting from
random initial parameters (50 times), we train a linear
SVM with 50 training examples. Let w be the weight
vector of the Bayes classiﬁer. We ﬁnd that training
only with “easy” examples (for which yw′x > 0) gives
rise to lower generalization error: 16.3% error vs 17.1%
error (average over 50 runs), and the diﬀerence is sta-
tistically signiﬁcant.
