Curriculum Learning
In principle one could argue that diﬃcult examples
can be more informative than easy examples.
Here
the diﬃcult examples are probably not useful because
they confuse the learner rather than help it establish
the right location of the decision surface. This exper-
iment does not involve a curriculum strategy yet, but
it may help to understand why easier examples could
be useful, by avoiding to confuse the learner.
4.2. Introducing Gradually More Diﬃcult
Examples Speeds-up Online Training
We train a Perceptron from artiﬁcially generated data
where the target is y = sign(w′xrelevant) and w is sam-
pled from a Normal(0,1). The training pairs are (x, y)
with x = (xrelevant, xirrelevant), i.e., some of the inputs
are irrelevant, not predictive of the target class. Rel-
evant inputs are sampled from a Uniform(0,1) distri-
bution. Irrelevant inputs can either be set to 0 or to
a Uniform(0,1). The number of irrelevant inputs that
is set to 0 varies randomly (uniformly) from example
to example, and can be used to sort examples from
the easiest (with all irrelevant inputs zeroed out) to
the most diﬃcult (with none of the irrelevant inputs
zeroed out). Another way to sort examples is by the
margin yw′x, with easiest examples corresponding to
larger values. The learning rate is 1 (it does not matter
since there is no margin and the classiﬁer output does
not depend on the magnitude of w′x but only on its
sign). Initial weights are sampled from a Normal(0,1).
We train the Perceptron with 200 examples (i.e., 200
Perceptron updates) and measure generalization error
at the end.
Figure 1 shows average estimated gen-
eralization error measured at the end of training and
averaged across 500 repetitions from diﬀerent initial
conditions and diﬀerent random sampling of training
examples. We compare a no curriculum setting (ran-
dom ordering), with a curriculum setting in which
examples are ordered by easiness, starting with the
easiest examples, and two easiness criteria (number of
noisy irrelevant inputs, margin yw′x). All error rate
diﬀerences between the curriculum strategy and the
no-curriculum are statistically signiﬁcant (diﬀerences
of more than .01 were all statistically signiﬁcant at 5%
under a t-test).
5. Experiments on shape recognition
The task of interest here is to classify geometri-
cal shapes into 3 classes (rectangle, ellipse, trian-
gle), where the input is a 32×32 grey-scale image.
As shown in Figure 2, two diﬀerent datasets were
generated:
whereas GeomShapes data consist in im-
ages of rectangles, ellipses and triangles, BasicShapes
data only include special cases of the above: squares,
Figure 1. Average error rate of Perceptron, with or with-
out the curriculum. Top: the number of nonzero irrelevant
inputs determines easiness. Bottom: the margin yw′x de-
termines easiness.
circles and equilateral triangles.
The diﬀerence be-
tween BasicShapes data and GeomShapes data is that
BasicShapes images exhibit less variability in shape.
Other degrees of variability which are present in both
sets are the following: object position, size, orienta-
tion, and also the grey levels of the foreground and
background. Besides, some geometrical constraints are
also added so as to ensure that any shape object ﬁts
entirely within the image, and a minimum size and
minimum contrast (diﬀerence in grey levels) between
foreground and background is imposed.
Note that the above “easy distribution” occupying a
very small volume in input space compared to the tar-
get distribution does not contradict condition 4. In-
deed, the non-zero weights (on easy examples) can ini-
tially be very small, so that their ﬁnal weight in the
target distribution can be very small.
Figure 2. Sample inputs from BasicShapes (top) and
GeomShapes (bottom).
Images are shown here with a
higher resolution than the actual dataset (32x32 pixels).
The experiments were carried out on a multi-layer neu-
ral network with 3 hidden layers, trained by stochas-
