conv
weights
uint8
input
+
biases
uint32
ReLU6
output
uint8
uint32
uint8
uint8
(a) Integer-arithmetic-only inference
conv
wt quant
weights
input
+
biases
ReLU6
act quant
output
(b) Training with simulated quantization
10
20
40
80
160
320
40
50
60
70
Latency (ms)
Top 1 Accuracy
Float
8-bit
(c) ImageNet latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff
Figure 1.1: Integer-arithmetic-only quantization. a) Integer-arithmetic-only inference of a convolution layer. The input and output
are represented as 8-bit integers according to equation 1. The convolution involves 8-bit integer operands and a 32-bit integer accumulator.
The bias addition involves only 32-bit integers (section 2.4). The ReLU6 nonlinearity only involves 8-bit integer arithmetic. b) Training
with simulated quantization of the convolution layer. All variables and computations are carried out using 32-bit ﬂoating-point arithmetic.
Weight quantization (“wt quant”) and activation quantization (“act quant”) nodes are injected into the computation graph to simulate the
effects of quantization of the variables (section 3). The resultant graph approximates the integer-arithmetic-only computation graph in panel
a), while being trainable using conventional optimization algorithms for ﬂoating point models. c) Our quantization scheme beneﬁts from
the fast integer-arithmetic circuits in common CPUs to deliver an improved latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff (section 4). The ﬁgure compares
integer quantized MobileNets [10] against ﬂoating point baselines on ImageNet [3] using Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 LITTLE cores.
tions [14, 27, 34]. With these approaches, both multiplica-
tions and additions can be implemented by efﬁcient bit-shift
and bit-count operations, which are showcased in custom
GPU kernels (BNN [14]). However, 1 bit quantization of-
ten leads to substantial performance degradation, and may
be overly stringent on model representation.
In this paper we address the above issues by improving
the latency-vs-accuracy tradeoffs of MobileNets on com-
mon mobile hardware. Our speciﬁc contributions are:
• We provide a quantization scheme (section 2.1) that
quantizesh both weights and activations as 8-bit integers,
and just a few parameters (bias vectors) as 32-bit integers.
• We provide a quantized inference framework that is ef-
ﬁciently implementable on integer-arithmetic-only hard-
ware such as the Qualcomm Hexagon (sections 2.2, 2.3),
and we describe an efﬁcient, accurate implementation on
ARM NEON (Appendix B).
• We provide a quantized training framework (section 3)
co-designed with our quantized inference to minimize the
loss of accuracy from quantization on real models.
• We apply our frameworks to efﬁcient classiﬁcation and
detection systems based on MobileNets and provide
benchmark results on popular ARM CPUs (section 4)
that show signiﬁcant improvements in the latency-vs-
accuracy tradeoffs for state-of-the-art MobileNet archi-
tectures, demonstrated in ImageNet classiﬁcation [3],
COCO object detection [23], and other tasks.
Our work draws inspiration from [7], which leverages
low-precision ﬁxed-point arithmetic to accelerate the train-
ing speed of CNNs, and from [31], which uses 8-bit ﬁxed-
point arithmetic to speed up inference on x86 CPUs. Our
quantization scheme focuses instead on improving the in-
ference speed vs accuracy tradeoff on mobile CPUs.
2. Quantized Inference
2.1. Quantization scheme
In this section, we describe our general quantization
scheme1 2, that is, the correspondence between the bit-
representation of values (denoted q below, for “quantized
value”) and their interpretation as mathematical real num-
bers (denoted r below, for “real value”). Our quantization
scheme is implemented using integer-only arithmetic dur-
ing inference and ﬂoating-point arithmetic during training,
with both implementations maintaining a high degree of
correspondence with each other. We achieve this by ﬁrst
providing a mathematically rigorous deﬁnition of our quan-
tization scheme, and separately adopting this scheme for
both integer-arithmetic inference and ﬂoating-point train-
ing.
1The quantization scheme described here is the one adopted in Tensor-
Flow Lite [5] and we will refer to speciﬁc parts of its code to illustrate
aspects discussed below.
2We had earlier described this quantization scheme in the documen-
tation of gemmlowp [18]. That page may still be useful as an alternate
treatment of some of the topics developed in this section, and for its self-
contained example code.
2705
