without having to expand the operands of the multiplication
into 16-bit integers, we ﬁrst notice that by distributing the
multiplication in Equation (4), we can rewrite it as
q(i,k)
3
= Z3 + M

NZ1Z2 −Z1a(k)
2
−Z2¯a(i)
1 +
N
X
j=1
q(i,j)
1
q(j,k)
2


(7)
where
a(k)
2
:=
N
X
j=1
q(j,k)
2
, ¯a(i)
1
:=
N
X
j=1
q(i,j)
1
.
(8)
Each a(k)
2
or ¯a(i)
1 takes only N additions to compute, so they
collectively take only 2N 2 additions. The rest of the cost of
the evaluation of (7) is almost entirely concentrated in the
core integer matrix multiplication accumulation
N
X
j=1
q(i,j)
1
q(j,k)
2
(9)
which takes 2N 3 arithmetic operations; indeed, everything
else involved in (7) is O(N 2) with a small constant in the O.
Thus, the expansion into the form (7) and the factored-out
computation of a(k)
2
and ¯a(i)
1
enable low-overhead handling
of arbitrary zero-points for anything but the smallest values
of N, reducing the problem to the same core integer matrix
multiplication accumulation (9) as we would have to com-
pute in any other zero-points-free quantization scheme.
2.4. Implementation of a typical fused layer
We continue the discussion of section 2.3, but now ex-
plicitly deﬁne the data types of all quantities involved, and
modify the quantized matrix multiplication (7) to merge
the bias-addition and activation function evaluation directly
into it. This fusing of whole layers into a single operation
is not only an optimization. As we must reproduce in in-
ference code the same arithmetic that is used in training,
the granularity of fused operators in inference code (taking
an 8-bit quantized input and producing an 8-bit quantized
output) must match the placement of “fake quantization”
operators in the training graph (section 3).
For our implementation on ARM and x86 CPU ar-
chitectures, we use the gemmlowp library [18], whose
GemmWithOutputPipeline entry point provides sup-
ports the fused operations that we now describe5.
5The discussion in this section is implemented in TensorFlow Lite [5]
for e.g. a Convolutional operator (reference code is self-contained, opti-
mized code calls into gemmlowp [18]).
We take the q1 matrix to be the weights, and the q2 matrix
to be the activations. Both the weights and activations are
of type uint8 (we could have equivalently chosen int8, with
suitably modiﬁed zero-points). Accumulating products of
uint8 values requires a 32-bit accumulator, and we choose a
signed type for the accumulator for a reason that will soon
become clear. The sum in (9) is thus of the form:
int32 += uint8 * uint8.
(10)
In order to have the quantized bias-addition be the addition
of an int32 bias into this int32 accumulator, the bias-vector
is quantized such that: it uses int32 as its quantized data
type; it uses 0 as its quantization zero-point Zbias; and its
quantization scale Sbias is the same as that of the accumu-
lators, which is the product of the scales of the weights and
of the input activations. In the notation of section 2.3,
Sbias = S1S2, Zbias = 0.
(11)
Although the bias-vectors are quantized as 32-bit values,
they account for only a tiny fraction of the parameters in a
neural network. Furthermore, the use of higher precision
for bias vectors meets a real need: as each bias-vector entry
is added to many output activations, any quantization error
in the bias-vector tends to act as an overall bias (i.e. an error
term with nonzero mean), which must be avoided in order
to preserve good end-to-end neural network accuracy6.
With the ﬁnal value of the int32 accumulator, there re-
main three things left to do: scale down to the ﬁnal scale
used by the 8-bit output activations, cast down to uint8 and
apply the activation function to yield the ﬁnal 8-bit output
activation.
The down-scaling corresponds to multiplication by the
multiplier M in equation (7). As explained in section 2.2, it
is implemented as a ﬁxed-point multiplication by a normal-
ized multiplier M0 and a rounding bit-shift. Afterwards, we
perform a saturating cast to uint8 and to the range [0, 255].
We focus on activation functions that are mere clamps,
e.g. ReLU, ReLU6. Mathematical functions are discussed
in Appendix A.1 and we do not currently fuse them into
such layers. Thus, the only thing that our fused activation
functions need to do is to further clamp the uint8 value to
some sub-interval of [0, 255] before storing the ﬁnal uint8
output activation. In practice, the quantized training pro-
cess (section 3) tends to learn to make use of the whole
output uint8 [0, 255] interval so that the activation function
no longer does anything, its effect being subsumed in the
clamping to [0, 255] implied in the saturating cast to uint8.
3. Training with simulated quantization
A common approach to training quantized networks is
to train in ﬂoating point and then quantize the resulting
6The quantization of bias-vectors discussed here is implemented here
in the TensorFlow Lite [5] Converter.
2707
