Quantization and Training of Neural Networks for Efﬁcient
Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference
Benoit Jacob
Skirmantas Kligys
Bo Chen
Menglong Zhu
Matthew Tang
Andrew Howard
Hartwig Adam
Dmitry Kalenichenko
{benoitjacob,skligys,bochen,menglong,
mttang,howarda,hadam,dkalenichenko}@google.com
Google Inc.
Abstract
The rising popularity of intelligent mobile devices and
the daunting computational cost of deep learning-based
models call for efﬁcient and accurate on-device inference
schemes. We propose a quantization scheme that allows
inference to be carried out using integer-only arithmetic,
which can be implemented more efﬁciently than ﬂoating
point inference on commonly available integer-only hard-
ware. We also co-design a training procedure to preserve
end-to-end model accuracy post quantization. As a result,
the proposed quantization scheme improves the tradeoff be-
tween accuracy and on-device latency. The improvements
are signiﬁcant even on MobileNets, a model family known
for run-time efﬁciency, and are demonstrated in ImageNet
classiﬁcation and COCO detection on popular CPUs.
1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are not well suited for use on mobile devices. Since
the advent of AlexNet [20], modern CNNs have primarily
been appraised according to classiﬁcation / detection accu-
racy. Thus network architectures have evolved without re-
gard to model complexity and computational efﬁciency. On
the other hand, successful deployment of CNNs on mobile
platforms such as smartphones, AR/VR devices (HoloLens,
Daydream), and drones require small model sizes to accom-
modate limited on-device memory, and low latency to main-
tain user engagement. This has led to a burgeoning ﬁeld of
research that focuses on reducing the model size and infer-
ence time of CNNs with minimal accuracy losses.
Approaches in this ﬁeld roughly fall into two cate-
gories. The ﬁrst category, exempliﬁed by MobileNet [10],
SqueezeNet [16], ShufﬂeNet [32], and DenseNet [11], de-
signs novel network architectures that exploit computation
/ memory efﬁcient operations. The second category quan-
tizes the weights and / or activations of a CNN from 32
bit ﬂoating point into lower bit-depth representations. This
methodology, embraced by approaches such as Ternary
weight networks (TWN [22]), Binary Neural Networks
(BNN [14]), XNOR-net [27], and more [8, 21, 26, 33, 34,
35], is the focus of our investigation. Despite their abun-
dance, current quantization approaches are lacking in two
respects when it comes to trading off latency with accuracy.
First, prior approaches have not been evaluated on a
reasonable baseline architecture. The most common base-
line architectures, AlexNet [20], VGG [28] and GoogleNet
[29], are all over-parameterized by design in order to extract
marginal accuracy improvements. Therefore, it is easy to
obtain sizable compression of these architectures, reducing
quantization experiments on these architectures to proof-
of-concepts at best. Instead, a more meaningful challenge
would be to quantize model architectures that are already ef-
ﬁcient at trading off latency with accuracy, e.g. MobileNets.
Second, many quantization approaches do not deliver
veriﬁable efﬁciency improvements on real hardware. Ap-
proaches that quantize only the weights ([2, 4, 8, 33]) are
primarily concerned with on-device storage and less with
computational efﬁciency.
Notable exceptions are binary,
ternary and bit-shift networks [14, 22, 27].
These latter
approaches employ weights that are either 0 or powers of
2, which allow multiplication to be implemented by bit
shifts. However, while bit-shifts can be efﬁcient in cus-
tom hardware, they provide little beneﬁt on existing hard-
ware with multiply-add instructions that, when properly
used (i.e.
pipelined), are not more expensive than addi-
tions alone. Moreover, multiplications are only expensive
if the operands are wide, and the need to avoid multiplica-
tions diminishes with bit depth once both weights and acti-
vations are quantized. Notably, these approaches rarely pro-
vide on-device measurements to verify the promised timing
improvements. More runtime-friendly approaches quantize
both the weights and the activations into 1 bit representa-
12704
