weights (sometimes with additional post-quantization train-
ing for ﬁne-tuning). We found that this approach works
sufﬁciently well for large models with considerable repre-
sentational capacity, but leads to signiﬁcant accuracy drops
for small models. Common failure modes for simple post-
training quantization include: 1) large differences (more
than 100×) in ranges of weights for different output chan-
nels (section 2 mandates that all channels of the same layer
be quantized to the same resolution, which causes weights
in channels with smaller ranges to have much higher relative
error) and 2) outlier weight values that make all remaining
weights less precise after quantization.
We propose an approach that simulates quantization ef-
fects in the forward pass of training. Backpropagation still
happens as usual, and all weights and biases are stored in
ﬂoating point so that they can be easily nudged by small
amounts.
The forward propagation pass however simu-
lates quantized inference as it will happen in the inference
engine, by implementing in ﬂoating-point arithmetic the
rounding behavior of the quantization scheme that we in-
troduced in section 2:
• Weights are quantized before they are convolved with
the input. If batch normalization (see [17]) is used for
the layer, the batch normalization parameters are “folded
into” the weights before quantization, see section 3.2.
• Activations are quantized at points where they would be
during inference, e.g. after the activation function is ap-
plied to a convolutional or fully connected layer’s output,
or after a bypass connection adds or concatenates the out-
puts of several layers together such as in ResNets.
For each layer, quantization is parameterized by the
number of quantization levels and clamping range, and is
performed by applying point-wise the quantization function
q deﬁned as follows:
clamp(r; a, b) := min (max(x, a), b)
s(a, b, n) := b −a
n −1
(12)
q(r; a, b, n) :=
clamp(r; a, b) −a
s(a, b, n)

s(a, b, n) + a,
where r is a real-valued number to be quantized, [a; b] is the
quantization range, n is the number of quantization levels,
and ⌊·⌉denotes rounding to the nearest integer. n is ﬁxed
for all layers in our experiments, e.g. n = 28 = 256 for 8
bit quantization.
3.1. Learning quantization ranges
Quantization ranges are treated differently for weight
quantization vs. activation quantization:
• For weights, the basic idea is simply to set a := min w,
b := max w. We apply a minor tweak to this so that
the weights, once quantized as int8 values, only range
in [−127, 127] and never take the value −128, as this en-
ables a substantial optimization opportunity (for more de-
tails, see Appendix B).
• For activations, ranges depend on the inputs to the net-
work. To estimate the ranges, we collect [a; b] ranges
seen on activations during training and then aggregate
them via exponential moving averages (EMA) with the
smoothing parameter being close to 1 so that observed
ranges are smoothed across thousands of training steps.
Given signiﬁcant delay in the EMA updating activation
ranges when the ranges shift rapidly, we found it useful
to completely disable activation quantization at the start
of training (say, for 50 thousand to 2 million steps). This
allows the network to enter a more stable state where ac-
tivation quantization ranges do not exclude a signiﬁcant
fraction of values.
In both cases, the boundaries [a; b] are nudged so that
value 0.0 is exactly representable as an integer z(a, b, n)
after quantization. As a result, the learned quantization pa-
rameters map to the scale S and zero-point Z in equation 1:
S = s(a, b, n), Z = z(a, b, n)
(13)
Below we depict simulated quantization assuming that
the computations of a neural network are captured as a Ten-
sorFlow graph [1]. A typical workﬂow is described in Al-
gorithm 1. Optimization of the inference graph by fusing
Algorithm 1 Quantized graph training and inference
1: Create a training graph of the ﬂoating-point model.
2: Insert fake quantization TensorFlow operations in lo-
cations where tensors will be downcasted to fewer bits
during inference according to equation 12.
3: Train in simulated quantized mode until convergence.
4: Create and optimize the inference graph for running in
a low bit inference engine.
5: Run inference using the quantized inference graph.
and removing operations is outside the scope of this pa-
per. Source code for graph modiﬁcations (inserting fake
quantization operations, creating and optimizing the infer-
ence graph) and a low bit inference engine has been open-
sourced with TensorFlow contributions in [19].
Figure 1.1a and b illustrate TensorFlow graphs before
and after quantization for a simple convolutional layer. Il-
lustrations of the more complex convolution with a bypass
connection in ﬁgure C.3 can be found in ﬁgure C.4.
Note that the biases are not quantized because they are
represented as 32-bit integers in the inference process, with
2708
