A basic requirement of our quantization scheme is that it
permits efﬁcient implementation of all arithmetic using only
integer arithmetic operations on the quantized values (we
eschew implementations requiring lookup tables because
these tend to perform poorly compared to pure arithmetic
on SIMD hardware). This is equivalent to requiring that the
quantization scheme be an afﬁne mapping of integers q to
real numbers r, i.e. of the form
r = S(q −Z)
(1)
for some constants S and Z. Equation (1) is our quantiza-
tion scheme and the constants S and Z are our quantization
parameters. Our quantization scheme uses a single set of
quantization parameters for all values within each activa-
tions array and within each weights array; separate arrays
use separate quantization parameters.
For 8-bit quantization, q is quantized as an 8-bit integer
(for B-bit quantization, q is quantized as an B-bit integer).
Some arrays, typically bias vectors, are quantized as 32-bit
integers, see section 2.4.
The constant S (for “scale”) is an arbitrary positive real
number. It is typically represented in software as a ﬂoating-
point quantity, like the real values r. Section 2.2 describes
methods for avoiding the representation of such ﬂoating-
point quantities in the inference workload.
The constant Z (for “zero-point”) is of the same type
as quantized values q, and is in fact the quantized value q
corresponding to the real value 0. This allows us to auto-
matically meet the requirement that the real value r = 0 be
exactly representable by a quantized value. The motivation
for this requirement is that efﬁcient implementation of neu-
ral network operators often requires zero-padding of arrays
around boundaries.
Our discussion so far is summarized in the following
quantized buffer data structure3, with one instance of such a
buffer existing for each activations array and weights array
in a neural network. We use C++ syntax because it allows
the unambiguous conveyance of types.
template<typename QType>
// e.g. QType=uint8
struct QuantizedBuffer {
vector<QType> q;
// the quantized values
float S;
// the scale
QType Z;
// the zero-point
};
2.2. Integer-arithmetic-only matrix multiplication
We now turn to the question of how to perform inference
using only integer arithmetic, i.e. how to use Equation (1)
to translate real-numbers computation into quantized-values
3The actual data structures in the TensorFlow Lite [5] Converter are
QuantizationParams and Array in this header ﬁle. As we discuss
in the next subsection, this data structure, which still contains a ﬂoating-
point quantity, does not appear in the actual quantized on-device inference
code.
computation, and how the latter can be designed to involve
only integer arithmetic even though the scale values S are
not integers.
Consider the multiplication of two square N × N ma-
trices of real numbers, r1 and r2, with their product repre-
sented by r3 = r1r2. We denote the entries of each of these
matrices rα (α = 1, 2 or 3) as r(i,j)
α
for 1 ⩽i, j ⩽N,
and the quantization parameters with which they are quan-
tized as (Sα, Zα). We denote the quantized entries by q(i,j)
α
.
Equation (1) then becomes:
r(i,j)
α
= Sα(q(i,j)
α
−Zα).
(2)
From the deﬁnition of matrix multiplication, we have
S3(q(i,k)
3
−Z3) =
N
X
j=1
S1(q(i,j)
1
−Z1)S2(q(j,k)
2
−Z2), (3)
which can be rewritten as
q(i,k)
3
= Z3 + M
N
X
j=1
(q(i,j)
1
−Z1)(q(j,k)
2
−Z2),
(4)
where the multiplier M is deﬁned as
M := S1S2
S3
.
(5)
In Equation (4), the only non-integer is the multiplier M.
As a constant depending only on the quantization scales
S1, S2, S3, it can be computed ofﬂine. We empirically ﬁnd
it to always be in the interval (0, 1), and can therefore ex-
press it in the normalized form
M = 2−nM0
(6)
where M0 is in the interval [0.5, 1) and n is a non-negative
integer. The normalized multiplier M0 now lends itself well
to being expressed as a ﬁxed-point multiplier (e.g. int16 or
int32 depending on hardware capability). For example, if
int32 is used, the integer representing M0 is the int32 value
nearest to 231M0. Since M0 ⩾0.5, this value is always at
least 230 and will therefore always have at least 30 bits of
relative accuracy. Multiplication by M0 can thus be imple-
mented as a ﬁxed-point multiplication4. Meanwhile, multi-
plication by 2−n can be implemented with an efﬁcient bit-
shift, albeit one that needs to have correct round-to-nearest
behavior, an issue that we return to in Appendix B.
2.3. Efﬁcient handling of zero-points
In order to efﬁciently implement the evaluation of Equa-
tion (4) without having to perform 2N 3 subtractions and
4The computation discussed in this section is implemented in Tensor-
Flow Lite [5] reference code for a fully-connected layer.
2706
