Computers 2025, 14, 291
4 of 25
2.2. Federated Learning with Knowledge Distillation
To support decentralized and privacy-aware deployment, federated learning (FL) has
been combined with KD. Zhao et al. [22] proposed a semi-supervised federated learning
(SSFL) scheme with KD. This achieved a precision of 91.73% on IoT traffic datasets com-
pared to that of traditional methods in federated learning such as MLP with only 87.57%.
Shen et al. [23] proposed an ensemble KD-based federated learning framework called
FLEKD, which achieved 99.8% accuracy in CIC-IDS2019 and further improved the detec-
tion of the most difficult attacks, i.e., UDPLag by 80.86% while ensuring challenges such
as data heterogeneity in IoT networks. Quyen et al. [24] developed the robust federated
learning framework of FedKD-IDS, introducing KD and anti-poisoning mechanisms to
overcome some of the challenges faced with non-independent data and poisoning attacks.
They achieved an accuracy of 79% in cases of poisoning attacks on the N-BaIoT dataset and
outperformed traditional semi-supervised federated methods by a large margin.
2.3. Hybrid and GAN-Based IDS with KD Approaches
Some works integrate KD with adversarial learning and generative models. Ravipati
and Abualkibash [25] proposed KDDT, which is a knowledge distillation-empowered
digital twin model in anomaly detection problems in train control systems. By combining
KD with a pre-trained variational autoencoder, the system achieved F1 scores of 93.1% and
91.5% on two datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in extracting both contextual and
temporal features. Ali et al. [26] proposed a lightweight intrusion detection system that
combined a generative adversarial network (GAN) and KD to handle adversarial threats in
IoT and IIoT networks. Their lightweight method maintained high accuracy, above 95% in
the classic NSL-KDD and CIC-IDS2017, while ensuring resource efficiency across datasets
like CIC-IDS2017 and IoT-23.
2.4. Cyber-Physical and Feature Fusion Models
Another stream of research focuses on combining cyber and physical domain features
for improved intrusion detection. Bertoli et al. [27] introduced AB-TRAP, an end-to-end
framework for ML-based NIDS that systematically covers key aspects such as realization
on target devices (kernel-space Linux modules or user-space NFQUEUE) and performance
evaluation on both LAN and Internet scenarios. They demonstrate deployment on a Rasp-
berry Pi in achieving F1-scores up to 0.96, AUC = 0.98, and only 1–4% CPU/RAM overhead
highlighting practical considerations for real-world, resource-constrained intrusion detec-
tion system. Hassler et al. [28] developed an intrusion detection system that fuses both
cyber and physical features to enhance the security of UAVs. The authors created a new
cyber-physical dataset capturing UAV operations under normal and attack conditions.
They evaluated various machine learning models and found that integrating cyber and
physical data significantly improves detection performance, especially against unseen
attacks of varying complexity. The results underscore the effectiveness of feature fusion in
securing cyber-physical systems. Hadi et al. [29] introduced autonomous collaborative IDS
(UAV-CIDS), a real-time collaborative IDS using a feedforward CNN to detect attacks on
UAV networks. UAV-CIDS analyzes encoded Wi-Fi traffic from three commercial drone
models (DBPower UDI, Parrot Bebop, DJI Spark) and is trained to spot zero-day threats.
On the UAVIDS dataset of real UAV traffic, the FFCNN model attains 98.23% accuracy. He
noted challenges in detecting UAV zero-day attacks as it lacks features like next-generation
networks (NGNs, 5G/6G).
