Academic Editor: Paolo Bellavista
Received: 15 June 2025
Revised: 15 July 2025
Accepted: 15 July 2025
Published: 19 July 2025
Citation: Wisanwanichthan, T.;
Thammawichai, M. A Lightweight
Intrusion Detection System for IoT and
UAV Using Deep Neural Networks
with Knowledge Distillation.
Computers 2025, 14, 291. https://
doi.org/10.3390/computers14070291
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
A Lightweight Intrusion Detection System for IoT and UAV
Using Deep Neural Networks with Knowledge Distillation
Treepop Wisanwanichthan
and Mason Thammawichai *
Electrical Engineering Department, Navaminda Kasatriyadhiraj Royal Air Force Academy, Saraburi 18180,
Thailand; treepop@rtaf.mi.th
* Correspondence: mason@rtaf.mi.th
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly effective for intrusion detection systems (IDS)
due to their ability to learn complex patterns and detect potential anomalies within the
systems. However, their high resource consumption requirements including memory and
computation make them difficult to deploy on low-powered platforms. This study explores
the possibility of using knowledge distillation (KD) to reduce constraints such as power
and hardware consumption and improve real-time inference speed but maintain high
detection accuracy in IDS across all attack types. The technique utilizes the transfer of
knowledge from DNNs (teacher) models to more lightweight shallow neural network
(student) models. KD has been proven to achieve significant parameter reduction (92–95%)
and faster inference speed (7–11%) while improving overall detection performance (up to
6.12%). Experimental results on datasets such as NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIC-IDS2017,
IoTID20, and UAV IDS demonstrate DNN with KD’s effectiveness in achieving high
accuracy, precision, F1 score, and area under the curve (AUC) metrics. These findings
confirm KD’s ability as a potential edge computing strategy for IoT and UAV devices,
which are suitable for resource-constrained environments and lead to real-time anomaly
detection for next-generation distributed systems.
Keywords: anomaly detection; deep neural network; information security; internet of
things; intrusion detection system; knowledge distillation; network security; lightweight
model; unmanned aerial vehicle
1. Introduction
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a security tool that helps monitor and analyze
the activities of a network or system for malicious actions. This implies that IDS is a
vital section of cybersecurity in the way that it can alert administrators when potential
threats occur [1]. There are two main types of IDS: signature-based and anomaly-based.
Signature-based IDS checks traffic against pre-defined patterns and anomaly-based IDS
operates by learning normal network activities and alerts once any deviations are found [2].
An anomaly IDS excels at identifying unknown threats like zero-day attacks that lack
exact-matched patterns, including attacks in IoT systems [3]. Therefore, IDS is often seen as
another layer of defense to complement other security measures, protecting systems against
serious cyber threats [4,5]. Deep learning utilizes artificial neural networks with multiple
layers of neurons to optimize pattern recognition and understand sophisticated data.
The system processes a substantial amount of data as well as extracts key characteristics
automatically [6]. Several architectures like convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
Computers 2025, 14, 291
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers14070291
