Computers 2025, 14, 291
3 of 25
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews related works on anomaly-based
IDS using neural networks and KD. Section 3 explains the methodology, including datasets,
data preprocessing, and the KD algorithm. Section 4 presents and analyzes the results
across five datasets: NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIC-IDS2017, IoTID20, and UAV IDS. Finally,
the conclusion is provided in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Recent advancements in intrusion detection have produced a wide variety of tech-
niques aimed at balancing detection accuracy with computational efficiency, particularly
for resource-constrained environments like IoT and UAV systems. This section organizes
existing work into five categories based on the main techniques employed, i.e., knowledge
distillation (KD), federated learning with KD, hybrid and GAN-based methods, cyber-
physical feature fusion, and architecture-specific or optimization-driven distillation. This
categorization highlights the strengths, limitations, and trends across current approaches.
All references in each category are sorted by year (earliest first).
2.1. Knowledge Distillation-Based IDS
A growing number of studies apply knowledge distillation to compress deep models
while maintaining competitive detection performance. A KD-based lightweight IDS model
was designed by Zhao et al. [17] by using a separation convolution technique for reducing
model size and computation cost by 99% and has achieved state-of-the-art accuracy of 94.3%
on the UNSWNB15 and 91.46% on KDDCUP99 dataset. Wang et al. [14] proposed a KD-
based triplet convolutional neural network for industrial CPS, which can reduce the model
size by 86% with only 0.4% loss of accuracy and showed better performance than state-of-
the-art methods on the NSL-KDD and CIC IDS2017 datasets. Chen et al. [18] proposed a
semi-supervised KD framework in campus networks. The work realized efficient intrusion
detection based on the distributed deployment at the aggregation layer and leveraged
labeled and unlabeled data in training. The framework resulted in 98.49% parameter
reduction and 98.52% decrease in FLOPs for the student models compared to the teacher
models while only slightly decreasing in accuracy of around 1–2%. Zhu et al. [19] proposed
LKD-STNN, a lightweight KD-based model for malicious traffic detection, which was able
to obtain accuracy above 98% on the ToN-IoT and IoT-23 datasets while reducing the model
parameters to less than 1% from the teacher model, thus proving ideal for deployment at
the edge devices. Ren et al. [20] propose a KD-based framework to detect GPS spoofing
attacks in small UAVs using a compact neural network suitable for resource-constrained
platforms. A long short-term memory (LSTM) model is first trained on telemetry data
(GPS, IMU, RSSI) and then distilled into a lightweight neural network (student) using KD.
Experimental results on the UAV IDS dataset from IEEE DataPort show that the student
model trained with LSTM achieves 95.74% reduction in model size (from 72.7 KB to 3.0 KB)
and 31.63% reduction in memory overhead. Wang et al. [16] proposed a CNN-based model
with two-dimensional Fourier transform and KD, which has less computational cost while
maintaining competitive accuracy in several public datasets. The teacher model consisted
of an eight-layer CNN compared to a one-layer CNN in the student model. The student
model can reduce the number of parameters from around 1.7 million to only one thousand,
while maintaining overall accuracy in every tested dataset. Abbasi et al. [21] demonstrated
the effectiveness of KD in IoT traffic classification, where student models trained using
KD achieved similar accuracy to larger teacher models from 93.57% to 92.45% but with
significant savings in computational cost and storage requirements.
