Computers 2025, 14, 291
5 of 25
2.5. Self-Knowledge Distillation and Optimization-Based Distillation
Several works emphasize self-distillation and architectural optimization.
Yang
et al. [30] proposed a lightweight self-knowledge distillation model, LNet-SKD, that accom-
plished high accuracy while reducing computation overhead. Li and Yao [15] designed a
two-stage lightweight intrusion detection model using self-supervised contrastive learning
and self-knowledge distillation in IoT networks, which has higher accuracy in intrusion
detection and attains better generalization among various public datasets such as KDD
CUP99, NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIC IDS2017, and BoT-IoT. Their methodology could
achieve up to 99.95% in accuracy in binary classification on KDD CUP99. Wang el al. [31]
proposed the TBCLNN model, which uses self-knowledge distillation to build a lightweight
intrusion detection system for IoT networks. The method utilizes the binary Harris hawk
optimization algorithm for feature selection and employs tied block convolution to design
efficient neural network blocks. An improved self-knowledge distillation loss function is
introduced to mitigate sample imbalance issues. The model achieves multiclassification
accuracies above 99% on three public IoT datasets while being computationally efficient.
These studies underline the growing role of KD in balancing performance and efficiency in
IDS, particularly for deployment in IoT and edge computing environments.
Despite significant progress in intrusion detection research, existing IDS models face
several key limitations. Traditional machine learning models often rely on manual feature
engineering and fail to generalize well to complex threats. Deep learning-based IDSs
can be offering high accuracy but typically computationally expensive and unsuitable for
deployment in resource-constrained environments such as IoT devices or UAV systems.
Ensemble and hybrid models tend to improve detection performance but increase model
size and inference time, limiting their real-time applicability. To address these challenges,
we conducted a study on a KD-based IDS framework that compresses high-capacity teacher
models into lightweight student models while preserving strong detection performance.
We further demonstrate the framework’s practicality by evaluating it across multiple
benchmark intrusion detection datasets.
Our study differs from existing work by focusing on the implementation of our pre-
defined deep neural network architecture integrated with KD and evaluating it across
multiple well-known and domain-specific intrusion detection datasets, including NSL-
KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIC-IDS2017, IoTID20, and the UAV IDS dataset. Unlike prior studies
that typically explore accuracy improvements or use KD with other techniques, our study
demonstrates that a standard deep learning (fully-connected neural networks) structure can
consistently work with the KD technique to achieve strong detection performance, faster
inference speed, and significant parameter reduction. A comparison table of key KD-based
IDS studies and our work is shown in Table 1. Also, we are the first to systematically apply
a vanilla KD framework across five diverse IDS datasets (traditional networks, IoT, and
UAV), all under the same architecture and hyperparameters to demonstrate cross-domain
generality without overparameterization.
Table 1. Comparison of key KD-based IDS studies and this work.
Study
Datasets Used
Methods
Key Contributions
Wang et al. (2022) [14]
NSL-KDD, CIC-IDS2017
Triplet-CNN teacher to
small CNN student via KD
Reduced model size by
86% with only 0.4%
accuracy loss;
outperformed SOTA on
both benchmarks.
