mapping from input vectors to output vectors. For cumbersome models that learn to discriminate
between a large number of classes, the normal training objective is to maximize the average log
probability of the correct answer, but a side-effect of the learning is that the trained model assigns
probabilities to all of the incorrect answers and even when these probabilities are very small, some
of them are much larger than others. The relative probabilities of incorrect answers tell us a lot about
how the cumbersome model tends to generalize. An image of a BMW, for example, may only have
a very small chance of being mistaken for a garbage truck, but that mistake is still many times more
probable than mistaking it for a carrot.
It is generally accepted that the objective function used for training should reﬂect the true objective
of the user as closely as possible. Despite this, models are usually trained to optimize performance
on the training data when the real objective is to generalize well to new data. It would clearly
be better to train models to generalize well, but this requires information about the correct way to
generalize and this information is not normally available. When we are distilling the knowledge
from a large model into a small one, however, we can train the small model to generalize in the same
way as the large model. If the cumbersome model generalizes well because, for example, it is the
average of a large ensemble of different models, a small model trained to generalize in the same way
will typically do much better on test data than a small model that is trained in the normal way on the
same training set as was used to train the ensemble.
An obvious way to transfer the generalization ability of the cumbersome model to a small model is
to use the class probabilities produced by the cumbersome model as “soft targets” for training the
small model. For this transfer stage, we could use the same training set or a separate “transfer” set.
When the cumbersome model is a large ensemble of simpler models, we can use an arithmetic or
geometric mean of their individual predictive distributions as the soft targets. When the soft targets
have high entropy, they provide much more information per training case than hard targets and much
less variance in the gradient between training cases, so the small model can often be trained on much
less data than the original cumbersome model and using a much higher learning rate.
For tasks like MNIST in which the cumbersome model almost always produces the correct answer
with very high conﬁdence, much of the information about the learned function resides in the ratios
of very small probabilities in the soft targets. For example, one version of a 2 may be given a
probability of 10−6 of being a 3 and 10−9 of being a 7 whereas for another version it may be the
other way around. This is valuable information that deﬁnes a rich similarity structure over the data
(i. e. it says which 2’s look like 3’s and which look like 7’s) but it has very little inﬂuence on the
cross-entropy cost function during the transfer stage because the probabilities are so close to zero.
Caruana and his collaborators circumvent this problem by using the logits (the inputs to the ﬁnal
softmax) rather than the probabilities produced by the softmax as the targets for learning the small
model and they minimize the squared difference between the logits produced by the cumbersome
model and the logits produced by the small model. Our more general solution, called “distillation”,
is to raise the temperature of the ﬁnal softmax until the cumbersome model produces a suitably soft
set of targets. We then use the same high temperature when training the small model to match these
soft targets. We show later that matching the logits of the cumbersome model is actually a special
case of distillation.
The transfer set that is used to train the small model could consist entirely of unlabeled data [1]
or we could use the original training set. We have found that using the original training set works
well, especially if we add a small term to the objective function that encourages the small model
to predict the true targets as well as matching the soft targets provided by the cumbersome model.
Typically, the small model cannot exactly match the soft targets and erring in the direction of the
correct answer turns out to be helpful.
2
Distillation
Neural networks typically produce class probabilities by using a “softmax” output layer that converts
the logit, zi, computed for each class into a probability, qi, by comparing zi with the other logits.
qi =
exp(zi/T )
P
j exp(zj/T )
(1)
2
