arXiv:1503.02531v1  [stat.ML]  9 Mar 2015
Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network
Geoffrey Hinton∗†
Google Inc.
Mountain View
geoffhinton@google.com
Oriol Vinyals†
Google Inc.
Mountain View
vinyals@google.com
Jeff Dean
Google Inc.
Mountain View
jeff@google.com
Abstract
A very simple way to improve the performance of almost any machine learning
algorithm is to train many different models on the same data and then to average
their predictions [3]. Unfortunately, making predictions using a whole ensemble
of models is cumbersome and may be too computationally expensive to allow de-
ployment to a large number of users, especially if the individual models are large
neural nets. Caruana and his collaborators [1] have shown that it is possible to
compress the knowledge in an ensemble into a single model which is much eas-
ier to deploy and we develop this approach further using a different compression
technique. We achieve some surprising results on MNIST and we show that we
can signiﬁcantly improve the acoustic model of a heavily used commercial system
by distilling the knowledge in an ensemble of models into a single model. We also
introduce a new type of ensemble composed of one or more full models and many
specialist models which learn to distinguish ﬁne-grained classes that the full mod-
els confuse. Unlike a mixture of experts, these specialist models can be trained
rapidly and in parallel.
1
Introduction
Many insects have a larval form that is optimized for extracting energy and nutrients from the envi-
ronment and a completely different adult form that is optimized for the very different requirements
of traveling and reproduction. In large-scale machine learning, we typically use very similar models
for the training stage and the deployment stage despite their very different requirements: For tasks
like speech and object recognition, training must extract structure from very large, highly redundant
datasets but it does not need to operate in real time and it can use a huge amount of computation.
Deployment to a large number of users, however, has much more stringent requirements on latency
and computational resources. The analogy with insects suggests that we should be willing to train
very cumbersome models if that makes it easier to extract structure from the data. The cumbersome
model could be an ensemble of separately trained models or a single very large model trained with
a very strong regularizer such as dropout [9]. Once the cumbersome model has been trained, we
can then use a different kind of training, which we call “distillation” to transfer the knowledge from
the cumbersome model to a small model that is more suitable for deployment. A version of this
strategy has already been pioneered by Rich Caruana and his collaborators [1]. In their important
paper they demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acquired by a large ensemble of models
can be transferred to a single small model.
A conceptual block that may have prevented more investigation of this very promising approach is
that we tend to identify the knowledge in a trained model with the learned parameter values and this
makes it hard to see how we can change the form of the model but keep the same knowledge. A more
abstract view of the knowledge, that frees it from any particular instantiation, is that it is a learned
∗Also afﬁliated with the University of Toronto and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
†Equal contribution.
1
