jittered by up to two pixels in any direction. This net achieved 67 test errors whereas a smaller
net with two hidden layers of 800 rectiﬁed linear hidden units and no regularization achieved 146
errors. But if the smaller net was regularized solely by adding the additional task of matching the soft
targets produced by the large net at a temperature of 20, it achieved 74 test errors. This shows that
soft targets can transfer a great deal of knowledge to the distilled model, including the knowledge
about how to generalize that is learned from translated training data even though the transfer set does
not contain any translations.
When the distilled net had 300 or more units in each of its two hidden layers, all temperatures above
8 gave fairly similar results. But when this was radically reduced to 30 units per layer, temperatures
in the range 2.5 to 4 worked signiﬁcantly better than higher or lower temperatures.
We then tried omitting all examples of the digit 3 from the transfer set. So from the perspective
of the distilled model, 3 is a mythical digit that it has never seen. Despite this, the distilled model
only makes 206 test errors of which 133 are on the 1010 threes in the test set. Most of the errors
are caused by the fact that the learned bias for the 3 class is much too low. If this bias is increased
by 3.5 (which optimizes overall performance on the test set), the distilled model makes 109 errors
of which 14 are on 3s. So with the right bias, the distilled model gets 98.6% of the test 3s correct
despite never having seen a 3 during training. If the transfer set contains only the 7s and 8s from the
training set, the distilled model makes 47.3% test errors, but when the biases for 7 and 8 are reduced
by 7.6 to optimize test performance, this falls to 13.2% test errors.
4
Experiments on speech recognition
In this section, we investigate the effects of ensembling Deep Neural Network (DNN) acoustic
models that are used in Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). We show that the distillation strategy
that we propose in this paper achieves the desired effect of distilling an ensemble of models into a
single model that works signiﬁcantly better than a model of the same size that is learned directly
from the same training data.
State-of-the-art ASR systems currently use DNNs to map a (short) temporal context of features
derived from the waveform to a probability distribution over the discrete states of a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) [4]. More speciﬁcally, the DNN produces a probability distribution over clusters of
tri-phone states at each time and a decoder then ﬁnds a path through the HMM states that is the best
compromise between using high probability states and producing a transcription that is probable
under the language model.
Although it is possible (and desirable) to train the DNN in such a way that the decoder (and, thus,
the language model) is taken into account by marginalizing over all possible paths, it is common to
train the DNN to perform frame-by-frame classiﬁcation by (locally) minimizing the cross entropy
between the predictions made by the net and the labels given by a forced alignment with the ground
truth sequence of states for each observation:
θ = arg max
θ′ P(ht|st; θ′)
where θ are the parameters of our acoustic model P which maps acoustic observations at time t,
st, to a probability, P(ht|st; θ′) , of the “correct” HMM state ht, which is determined by a forced
alignment with the correct sequence of words. The model is trained with a distributed stochastic
gradient descent approach.
We use an architecture with 8 hidden layers each containing 2560 rectiﬁed linear units and a ﬁnal
softmax layer with 14,000 labels (HMM targets ht). The input is 26 frames of 40 Mel-scaled ﬁlter-
bank coefﬁcients with a 10ms advance per frame and we predict the HMM state of 21st frame. The
total number of parameters is about 85M. This is a slightly outdated version of the acoustic model
used by Android voice search, and should be considered as a very strong baseline. To train the DNN
acoustic model we use about 2000 hours of spoken English data, which yields about 700M training
examples. This system achieves a frame accuracy of 58.9%, and a Word Error Rate (WER) of 10.9%
on our development set.
4
