System & training set
Train Frame Accuracy
Test Frame Accuracy
Baseline (100% of training set)
63.4%
58.9%
Baseline (3% of training set)
67.3%
44.5%
Soft Targets (3% of training set)
65.4%
57.0%
Table 5: Soft targets allow a new model to generalize well from only 3% of the training set. The soft
targets are obtained by training on the full training set.
6.1
Using soft targets to prevent specialists from overﬁtting
The specialists that we used in our experiments on the JFT dataset collapsed all of their non-specialist
classes into a single dustbin class. If we allow specialists to have a full softmax over all classes,
there may be a much better way to prevent them overﬁtting than using early stopping. A specialist
is trained on data that is highly enriched in its special classes. This means that the effective size of
its training set is much smaller and it has a strong tendency to overﬁt on its special classes. This
problem cannot be solved by making the specialist a lot smaller because then we lose the very helpful
transfer effects we get from modeling all of the non-specialist classes.
Our experiment using 3% of the speech data strongly suggests that if a specialist is initialized with
the weights of the generalist, we can make it retain nearly all of its knowledge about the non-special
classes by training it with soft targets for the non-special classes in addition to training it with hard
targets. The soft targets can be provided by the generalist. We are currently exploring this approach.
7
Relationship to Mixtures of Experts
The use of specialists that are trained on subsets of the data has some resemblance to mixtures of
experts [6] which use a gating network to compute the probability of assigning each example to each
expert. At the same time as the experts are learning to deal with the examples assigned to them, the
gating network is learning to choose which experts to assign each example to based on the relative
discriminative performance of the experts for that example. Using the discriminative performance
of the experts to determine the learned assignments is much better than simply clustering the input
vectors and assigning an expert to each cluster, but it makes the training hard to parallelize: First,
the weighted training set for each expert keeps changing in a way that depends on all the other
experts and second, the gating network needs to compare the performance of different experts on
the same example to know how to revise its assignment probabilities. These difﬁculties have meant
that mixtures of experts are rarely used in the regime where they might be most beneﬁcial: tasks
with huge datasets that contain distinctly different subsets.
It is much easier to parallelize the training of multiple specialists. We ﬁrst train a generalist model
and then use the confusion matrix to deﬁne the subsets that the specialists are trained on. Once these
subsets have been deﬁned the specialists can be trained entirely independently. At test time we can
use the predictions from the generalist model to decide which specialists are relevant and only these
specialists need to be run.
8
Discussion
We have shown that distilling works very well for transferring knowledge from an ensemble or
from a large highly regularized model into a smaller, distilled model. On MNIST distillation works
remarkably well even when the transfer set that is used to train the distilled model lacks any examples
of one or more of the classes. For a deep acoustic model that is version of the one used by Android
voice search, we have shown that nearly all of the improvement that is achieved by training an
ensemble of deep neural nets can be distilled into a single neural net of the same size which is far
easier to deploy.
For really big neural networks, it can be infeasible even to train a full ensemble, but we have shown
that the performance of a single really big net that has been trained for a very long time can be signif-
icantly improved by learning a large number of specialist nets, each of which learns to discriminate
between the classes in a highly confusable cluster. We have not yet shown that we can distill the
knowledge in the specialists back into the single large net.
8
