JFT 1: Tea party; Easter; Bridal shower; Baby shower; Easter Bunny; ...
JFT 2: Bridge; Cable-stayed bridge; Suspension bridge; Viaduct; Chimney; ...
JFT 3: Toyota Corolla E100; Opel Signum; Opel Astra; Mazda Familia; ...
Table 2: Example classes from clusters computed by our covariance matrix clustering algorithm
around the other two types, but only if a lot more cores are available. Waiting for several years to
train an ensemble of models was not an option, so we needed a much faster way to improve the
baseline model.
5.2
Specialist Models
When the number of classes is very large, it makes sense for the cumbersome model to be an en-
semble that contains one generalist model trained on all the data and many “specialist” models, each
of which is trained on data that is highly enriched in examples from a very confusable subset of the
classes (like different types of mushroom). The softmax of this type of specialist can be made much
smaller by combining all of the classes it does not care about into a single dustbin class.
To reduce overﬁtting and share the work of learning lower level feature detectors, each specialist
model is initialized with the weights of the generalist model. These weights are then slightly modi-
ﬁed by training the specialist with half its examples coming from its special subset and half sampled
at random from the remainder of the training set. After training, we can correct for the biased train-
ing set by incrementing the logit of the dustbin class by the log of the proportion by which the
specialist class is oversampled.
5.3
Assigning classes to specialists
In order to derive groupings of object categories for the specialists, we decided to focus on categories
that our full network often confuses. Even though we could have computed the confusion matrix
and used it as a way to ﬁnd such clusters, we opted for a simpler approach that does not require the
true labels to construct the clusters.
In particular, we apply a clustering algorithm to the covariance matrix of the predictions of our
generalist model, so that a set of classes Sm that are often predicted together will be used as targets
for one of our specialist models, m. We applied an on-line version of the K-means algorithm to the
columns of the covariance matrix, and obtained reasonable clusters (shown in Table 2). We tried
several clustering algorithms which produced similar results.
5.4
Performing inference with ensembles of specialists
Before investigating what happens when specialist models are distilled, we wanted to see how well
ensembles containing specialists performed. In addition to the specialist models, we always have a
generalist model so that we can deal with classes for which we have no specialists and so that we
can decide which specialists to use. Given an input image x, we do top-one classiﬁcation in two
steps:
Step 1: For each test case, we ﬁnd the n most probable classes according to the generalist model.
Call this set of classes k. In our experiments, we used n = 1.
Step 2: We then take all the specialist models, m, whose special subset of confusable classes, Sm,
has a non-empty intersection with k and call this the active set of specialists Ak (note that this set
may be empty). We then ﬁnd the full probability distribution q over all the classes that minimizes:
KL(pg, q) +
X
m∈Ak
KL(pm, q)
(5)
where KL denotes the KL divergence, and pm pg denote the probability distribution of a specialist
model or the generalist full model. The distribution pm is a distribution over all the specialist classes
of m plus a single dustbin class, so when computing its KL divergence from the full q distribution
we sum all of the probabilities that the full q distribution assigns to all the classes in m’s dustbin.
6
