where T is a temperature that is normally set to 1. Using a higher value for T produces a softer
probability distribution over classes.
In the simplest form of distillation, knowledge is transferred to the distilled model by training it on
a transfer set and using a soft target distribution for each case in the transfer set that is produced by
using the cumbersome model with a high temperature in its softmax. The same high temperature is
used when training the distilled model, but after it has been trained it uses a temperature of 1.
When the correct labels are known for all or some of the transfer set, this method can be signiﬁcantly
improved by also training the distilled model to produce the correct labels. One way to do this is
to use the correct labels to modify the soft targets, but we found that a better way is to simply use
a weighted average of two different objective functions. The ﬁrst objective function is the cross
entropy with the soft targets and this cross entropy is computed using the same high temperature in
the softmax of the distilled model as was used for generating the soft targets from the cumbersome
model. The second objective function is the cross entropy with the correct labels. This is computed
using exactly the same logits in softmax of the distilled model but at a temperature of 1. We found
that the best results were generally obtained by using a condiderably lower weight on the second
objective function. Since the magnitudes of the gradients produced by the soft targets scale as 1/T 2
it is important to multiply them by T 2 when using both hard and soft targets. This ensures that the
relative contributions of the hard and soft targets remain roughly unchanged if the temperature used
for distillation is changed while experimenting with meta-parameters.
2.1
Matching logits is a special case of distillation
Each case in the transfer set contributes a cross-entropy gradient, dC/dzi, with respect to each
logit, zi of the distilled model. If the cumbersome model has logits vi which produce soft target
probabilities pi and the transfer training is done at a temperature of T , this gradient is given by:
∂C
∂zi
= 1
T (qi −pi) = 1
T
 
ezi/T
P
j ezj/T −
evi/T
P
j evj/T
!
(2)
If the temperature is high compared with the magnitude of the logits, we can approximate:
∂C
∂zi
≈1
T
 
1 + zi/T
N + P
j zj/T −
1 + vi/T
N + P
j vj/T
!
(3)
If we now assume that the logits have been zero-meaned separately for each transfer case so that
P
j zj = P
j vj = 0 Eq. 3 simpliﬁes to:
∂C
∂zi
≈
1
NT 2 (zi −vi)
(4)
So in the high temperature limit, distillation is equivalent to minimizing 1/2(zi −vi)2, provided the
logits are zero-meaned separately for each transfer case. At lower temperatures, distillation pays
much less attention to matching logits that are much more negative than the average. This is poten-
tially advantageous because these logits are almost completely unconstrained by the cost function
used for training the cumbersome model so they could be very noisy. On the other hand, the very
negative logits may convey useful information about the knowledge acquired by the cumbersome
model. Which of these effects dominates is an empirical question. We show that when the distilled
model is much too small to capture all of the knowledege in the cumbersome model, intermedi-
ate temperatures work best which strongly suggests that ignoring the large negative logits can be
helpful.
3
Preliminary experiments on MNIST
To see how well distillation works, we trained a single large neural net with two hidden layers
of 1200 rectiﬁed linear hidden units on all 60,000 training cases. The net was strongly regularized
using dropout and weight-constraints as described in [5]. Dropout can be viewed as a way of training
an exponentially large ensemble of models that share weights. In addition, the input images were
3
