System
Test Frame Accuracy
WER
Baseline
58.9%
10.9%
10xEnsemble
61.1%
10.7%
Distilled Single model
60.8%
10.7%
Table 1: Frame classiﬁcation accuracy and WER showing that the distilled single model performs
about as well as the averaged predictions of 10 models that were used to create the soft targets.
4.1
Results
We trained 10 separate models to predict P(ht|st; θ), using exactly the same architecture and train-
ing procedure as the baseline. The models are randomly initialized with different initial parameter
values and we ﬁnd that this creates sufﬁcient diversity in the trained models to allow the averaged
predictions of the ensemble to signiﬁcantly outperform the individual models. We have explored
adding diversity to the models by varying the sets of data that each model sees, but we found this
to not signiﬁcantly change our results, so we opted for the simpler approach. For the distillation we
tried temperatures of [1, 2, 5, 10] and used a relative weight of 0.5 on the cross-entropy for the hard
targets, where bold font indicates the best value that was used for table 1 .
Table 1 shows that, indeed, our distillation approach is able to extract more useful information from
the training set than simply using the hard labels to train a single model. More than 80% of the
improvement in frame classiﬁcation accuracy achieved by using an ensemble of 10 models is trans-
ferred to the distilled model which is similar to the improvement we observed in our preliminary
experiments on MNIST. The ensemble gives a smaller improvement on the ultimate objective of
WER (on a 23K-word test set) due to the mismatch in the objective function, but again, the im-
provement in WER achieved by the ensemble is transferred to the distilled model.
We have recently become aware of related work on learning a small acoustic model by matching
the class probabilities of an already trained larger model [8]. However, they do the distillation at a
temperature of 1 using a large unlabeled dataset and their best distilled model only reduces the error
rate of the small model by 28% of the gap between the error rates of the large and small models
when they are both trained with hard labels.
5
Training ensembles of specialists on very big datasets
Training an ensemble of models is a very simple way to take advantage of parallel computation and
the usual objection that an ensemble requires too much computation at test time can be dealt with
by using distillation. There is, however, another important objection to ensembles: If the individual
models are large neural networks and the dataset is very large, the amount of computation required
at training time is excessive, even though it is easy to parallelize.
In this section we give an example of such a dataset and we show how learning specialist models that
each focus on a different confusable subset of the classes can reduce the total amount of computation
required to learn an ensemble. The main problem with specialists that focus on making ﬁne-grained
distinctions is that they overﬁt very easily and we describe how this overﬁtting may be prevented by
using soft targets.
5.1
The JFT dataset
JFT is an internal Google dataset that has 100 million labeled images with 15,000 labels. When we
did this work, Google’s baseline model for JFT was a deep convolutional neural network [7] that had
been trained for about six months using asynchronous stochastic gradient descent on a large number
of cores. This training used two types of parallelism [2]. First, there were many replicas of the
neural net running on different sets of cores and processing different mini-batches from the training
set. Each replica computes the average gradient on its current mini-batch and sends this gradient
to a sharded parameter server which sends back new values for the parameters. These new values
reﬂect all of the gradients received by the parameter server since the last time it sent parameters
to the replica. Second, each replica is spread over multiple cores by putting different subsets of
the neurons on each core. Ensemble training is yet a third type of parallelism that can be wrapped
5
