27
Metrics
AlexNet
GoogLeNet v1
dense
sparse
dense
sparse
Top-5 error
19.6
20.4
11.7
12.7
Number of CONV Layers
5
5
57
57
Depth in
(Number of CONV Layers)
5
5
21
21
Filter Sizes
3,5,11
1,3,5,7
Number of Channels
3-256
3-832
Number of Filters
96-384
16-384
Stride
1,4
1,2
NZ Weights
2.3M
351k
6.0M
1.5M
NZ MACs
395M
56.4M
806M
220M
FC Layers
3
3
1
1
Filter Sizes
1,6
1
Number of Channels
256-4096
1024
Number of Filters
1000-4096
1000
NZ Weights
58.6M
5.4M
1M
870k
NZ MACs
14.5M
1.9M
635k
663k
Total NZ Weights
61M
5.7M
7M
2.4M
Total NZ MACs
410M
58.3M
806M
221M
TABLE IV
METRICS FOR POPULAR DNN MODELS. SPARSITY IS ACCOUNT FOR BY
REPORTING NON-ZERO (NZ) WEIGHTS AND MACS.
consistent.13 Note that accounting for the number of non-zero
(NZ) operations signiﬁcantly reduces the number of MACs
and weights. Since the number of NZ MACs depends on the
input data, we propose using the publicly available 50,000
validation images from ImageNet for the computation. Finally,
there are various methods to reduce the weights in a DNN
(e.g., network pruning in Section VII-B2). Table IV shows
another example of these DNN model metrics, by comparing
sparse DNNs pruned using [142] to dense DNNs.
B. Metrics for DNN Hardware
To measure the efﬁciency of the DNN hardware, we should
consider the following additional metrics:
• The power and energy consumption of the design should
be reported for various DNN models; the DNN model
speciﬁcations should be provided including which layers
and bit precision are supported by the hardware during
measurement. In addition, the amount of off-chip accesses
(e.g., DRAM accesses) should be included since it
accounts for a signiﬁcant portion of the system power; it
can be reported in terms of the total amount of data that
is read and written off-chip per inference.
• The latency and throughput should be reported in terms
of the batch size and the actual run time for various
DNN models, which accounts for mapping and memory
bandwidth effects. This provides a more useful and
informative metric than peak throughput.
• The cost of the chip depends on the area efﬁciency, which
accounts for the size and type of memory (e.g., registers
or SRAM) and the amount of control logic. It should be
13Data augmentation is often used to increase accuracy. This includes using
multiple crops of an image to account for misalignment; in addition, an
ensemble of multiple models can be used where each model has different
weights due to different training settings, such as using different initializations
or datasets, or even different network architectures. If multiple crops and
models are used, then the number of MACs and weights required would
increase.
reported in terms of the core area in squared millimeters
per multiplier along with process technology.
In terms of cost, different platforms will have different
implementation-speciﬁc metrics. For instance, for an FPGA,
the speciﬁc device should be reported, along with the utilization
of resources such as DSP, BRAM, LUT and FF; performance
density such as GOPs/slice can also be reported.
Each processor should report various speciﬁcations for each
metric as shown in Table V, using the Eyeriss chip as an
example. It is important that all metrics and speciﬁcations are
accounted for in order fairly evaluate all the design trade-offs.
For instance, without the accuracy given for a speciﬁc dataset
and task, one could run a simple DNN and easily claim low
power, high throughput, and low cost – however, the processor
might not be usable for a meaningful task; alternatively, without
reporting the off-chip bandwidth, one could build a processor
with only multipliers and easily claim low cost, high throughput,
high accuracy, and low chip power – however, when evaluating
system power, the off-chip memory access would be substantial.
Finally, the test setup should also be reported, including whether
the results are measured or obtained from simulation14 and
how many images were tested.
In summary, the evaluation process for whether a DNN
system is a viable solution for a given application might go as
follows: (1) the accuracy determines if it can perform the given
task; (2) the latency and throughput determine if it can run fast
enough and in real-time; (3) the energy and power consumption
will primarily dictate the form factor of the device where the
processing can operate; (4) the cost, which is primarily dictated
by the chip area, determines how much one would pay for this
solution.
IX. SUMMARY
The use of deep neural networks (DNNs) has seen explosive
growth in the past few years. They are currently widely used
for many artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications including
computer vision, speech recognition and robotics and are often
delivering better than human accuracy. However, while DNNs
can deliver this outstanding accuracy, it comes at the cost
of high computational complexity. Consequently, techniques
that enable efﬁcient processing of deep neural network to
improve energy-efﬁciency and throughput without sacriﬁcing
accuracy with cost-effective hardware are critical to expanding
the deployment of DNNs in both existing and new domains.
Creating a system for efﬁcient DNN processing should
begin with understanding the current and future applications
and the speciﬁc computations required both now and the
potential evolution of those computations. This article surveys a
number of the current applications, focusing on computer vision
applications, the associated algorithms, and the data being used
to drive the algorithms. These applications, algorithms and
input data are experiencing rapid change. So extrapolating
these trends to determine the degree of ﬂexibility desired to
handle next generation computations, becomes an important
ingredient of any design project.
14If obtained from simulation, it should be clariﬁed whether it is from
synthesis or post place-and-route and what library corner was used.
