6
Feed Forward 
Recurrent 
(a) Feedforward versus feedback (re-
current) networks
Fully-Connected 
Sparsely-Connected 
(b) Fully connected versus sparse
Fig. 8.
Different types of neural networks (Figure adopted from [7]).
these applications. Speech recognition enables us to seamlessly
interact with electronic devices, such as smartphones. While
currently most of the processing for applications such as Apple
Siri and Amazon Alexa voice services is in the cloud, it is
still desirable to perform the recognition on the device itself to
reduce latency and dependency on connectivity, and to improve
privacy and security.
Many of the embedded platforms that perform DNN infer-
ence have stringent energy consumption, compute and memory
cost limitations; efﬁcient processing of DNNs have thus become
of prime importance under these constraints. Therefore, in this
article, we will focus on the compute requirements for inference
rather than training.
III. OVERVIEW OF DNNS
DNNs come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes depending
on the application. The popular shapes and sizes are also
evolving rapidly to improve accuracy and efﬁciency. In all
cases, the input to a DNN is a set of values representing the
information to be analyzed by the network. For instance, these
values can be pixels of an image, sampled amplitudes of an
audio wave or the numerical representation of the state of some
system or game.
The networks that process the input come in two major
forms: feed forward and recurrent as shown in Fig. 8(a). In
feed-forward networks all of the computation is performed as a
sequence of operations on the outputs of a previous layer. The
ﬁnal set of operations generates the output of the network, for
example a probability that an image contains a particular object,
the probability that an audio sequence contains a particular
word, a bounding box in an image around an object or the
proposed action that should be taken. In such DNNs, the
network has no memory and the output for an input is always
the same irrespective of the sequence of inputs previously given
to the network.
In contrast, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), of which
Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) [38] are a
popular variant, have internal memory to allow long-term
dependencies to affect the output. In these networks, some
intermediate operations generate values that are stored internally
in the network and used as inputs to other operations in
conjunction with the processing of a later input. In this article,
we will focus on feed-forward networks since (1) the major
computation in RNNs is still the weighted sum, which is
covered by the feed-forward networks, and (2) to-date little
attention has been given to hardware acceleration speciﬁcally
for RNNs.
DNNs can be composed solely of fully-connected (FC)
layers (also referred to as multi-layer perceptrons, or MLP)
as shown in the leftmost layer of Fig. 8(b). In a FC layer,
all output activations are composed of a weighted sum of
all input activations (i.e., all outputs are connected to all
inputs). This requires a signiﬁcant amount of storage and
computation. Thankfully, in many applications, we can remove
some connections between the activations by setting the weights
to zero without affecting accuracy. This results in a sparsely-
connected layer. A sparsely connected layer is illustrated in
the rightmost layer of Fig. 8(b).
We can also make the computation more efﬁcient by limiting
the number of weights that contribute to an output. This sort of
structured sparsity can arise if each output is only a function
of a ﬁxed-size window of inputs. Even further efﬁciency can
be gained if the same set of weights are used in the calculation
of every output. This repeated use of the same weight values is
called weight sharing and can signiﬁcantly reduce the storage
requirements for weights.
An extremely popular windowed and weight-shared DNN
layer arises by structuring the computation as a convolution,
as shown in Fig. 9(a), where the weighted sum for each output
activation is computed using only a small neighborhood of input
activations (i.e., all weights beyond beyond the neighborhood
are set to zero), and where the same set of weights are shared for
every output (i.e., the ﬁlter is space invariant). Such convolution-
based layers are referred to as convolutional (CONV) layers. 6
A. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
A common form of DNNs is Convolutional Neural Nets
(CNNs), which are composed of multiple CONV layers as
shown in Fig. 10. In such networks, each layer generates a
successively higher-level abstraction of the input data, called
a feature map (fmap), which preserves essential yet unique
information. Modern CNNs are able to achieve superior per-
formance by employing a very deep hierarchy of layers. CNN
are widely used in a variety of applications including image
understanding [3], speech recognition [39], game play [6],
robotics [32], etc. This paper will focus on its use in image
processing, speciﬁcally for the task of image classiﬁcation [3].
Each of the CONV layers in CNN is primarily composed of
high-dimensional convolutions as shown in Fig. 9(b). In this
computation, the input activations of a layer are structured as
a set of 2-D input feature maps (ifmaps), each of which is
called a channel. Each channel is convolved with a distinct
2-D ﬁlter from the stack of ﬁlters, one for each channel; this
stack of 2-D ﬁlters is often referred to as a single 3-D ﬁlter.
The results of the convolution at each point are summed across
all the channels. In addition, a 1-D bias can be added to the
ﬁltering results, but some recent networks [15] remove its
usage from parts of the layers. The result of this computation
is the output activations that comprise one channel of output
feature map (ofmap). Additional 3-D ﬁlters can be used on
6Note: the structured sparsity in CONV layers is orthogonal to the sparsity
that occurs from network pruning as described in Section VII-B2.
