2
Artificial Intelligence 
Machine Learning 
Brain-Inspired 
Spiking 
 
Neural 
Networks 
Deep 
Learning 
Fig. 1.
Deep Learning in the context of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
achieve goals like humans do, according to John McCarthy,
the computer scientist who coined the term in the 1950s.
The relationship of deep learning to the whole of artiﬁcial
intelligence is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Within artiﬁcial intelligence is a large sub-ﬁeld called
machine learning, which was deﬁned in 1959 by Arthur Samuel
as the ﬁeld of study that gives computers the ability to learn
without being explicitly programmed. That means a single
program, once created, will be able to learn how to do some
intelligent activities outside the notion of programming. This is
in contrast to purpose-built programs whose behavior is deﬁned
by hand-crafted heuristics that explicitly and statically deﬁne
their behavior.
The advantage of an effective machine learning algorithm
is clear. Instead of the laborious and hit-or-miss approach of
creating a distinct, custom program to solve each individual
problem in a domain, the single machine learning algorithm
simply needs to learn, via a processes called training, to handle
each new problem.
Within the machine learning ﬁeld, there is an area that is
often referred to as brain-inspired computation. Since the brain
is currently the best ‘machine’ we know for learning and
solving problems, it is a natural place to look for a machine
learning approach. Therefore, a brain-inspired computation is
a program or algorithm that takes some aspects of its basic
form or functionality from the way the brain works. This is in
contrast to attempts to create a brain, but rather the program
aims to emulate some aspects of how we understand the brain
to operate.
Although scientists are still exploring the details of how the
brain works, it is generally believed that the main computational
element of the brain is the neuron. There are approximately
86 billion neurons in the average human brain. The neurons
themselves are connected together with a number of elements
entering them called dendrites and an element leaving them
called an axon as shown in Fig. 2. The neuron accepts the
signals entering it via the dendrites, performs a computation on
those signals, and generates a signal on the axon. These input
and output signals are referred to as activations. The axon of
one neuron branches out and is connected to the dendrites of
many other neurons. The connections between a branch of the
axon and a dendrite is called a synapse. There are estimated
yj = f
wixi
i∑
+ b
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
w1x1
w2x2
w0x0
x0
w0 synapse 
axon 
dendrite 
axon 
neuron 
yj
Fig. 2.
Connections to a neuron in the brain. xi, wi, f(·), and b are the
activations, weights, non-linear function and bias, respectively. (Figure adopted
from [7].)
to be 1014 to 1015 synapses in the average human brain.
A key characteristic of the synapse is that it can scale the
signal (xi) crossing it as shown in Fig. 2. That scaling factor
can be referred to as a weight (wi), and the way the brain is
believed to learn is through changes to the weights associated
with the synapses. Thus, different weights result in different
responses to an input. Note that learning is the adjustment
of the weights in response to a learning stimulus, while the
organization (what might be thought of as the program) of the
brain does not change. This characteristic makes the brain an
excellent inspiration for a machine-learning-style algorithm.
Within the brain-inspired computing paradigm there is a
subarea called spiking computing. In this subarea, inspiration
is taken from the fact that the communication on the dendrites
and axons are spike-like pulses and that the information being
conveyed is not just based on a spike’s amplitude. Instead,
it also depends on the time the pulse arrives and that the
computation that happens in the neuron is a function of not just
a single value but the width of pulse and the timing relationship
between different pulses. An example of a project that was
inspired by the spiking of the brain is the IBM TrueNorth [8].
In contrast to spiking computing, another subarea of brain-
inspired computing is called neural networks, which is the
focus of this article.1
B. Neural Networks and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
Neural networks take their inspiration from the notion that
a neuron’s computation involves a weighted sum of the input
values. These weighted sums correspond to the value scaling
performed by the synapses and the combining of those values
in the neuron. Furthermore, the neuron doesn’t just output that
weighted sum, since the computation associated with a cascade
of neurons would then be a simple linear algebra operation.
Instead there is a functional operation within the neuron that
is performed on the combined inputs. This operation appears
to be a non-linear function that causes a neuron to generate
an output only if the inputs cross some threshold. Thus by
analogy, neural networks apply a non-linear function to the
weighted sum of the input values. We look at what some of
those non-linear functions are in Section III-A1.
1Note: Recent work using TrueNorth in a stylized fashion allows it to be
used to compute reduced precision neural networks [9]. These types of neural
networks are discussed in Section VII-A.
