20
earlier, lower precision is required for analog computation due
to circuit non-idealities.
In [111], the matrix multiplication is integrated into the
ADC, where the most signiﬁcant bits of the multiplications
are performed using switched capacitors in an 8-bit successive
approximation format. This is extended in [112] to not only
perform the multiplications, but also the accumulations in the
analog domain. In this work, it is assumed that 3-bits and
6-bits are sufﬁcient to represent the weights and activations,
respectively. This reduces the number of ADC conversions in
the sensor by 21×. RedEye [113] takes this approach even
further by performing the entire convolution layer (including
convolution, max pooling and quantization) in the analog
domain at the sensor. It should be noted that [111] and [112]
report measured results from fabricated test chips, while results
in [113] are from simulations.
It is also feasible to embed the computation not just before
the ADC, but into the sensor itself. For instance, in [114] an
Angle Sensitive Pixels sensor is used to compute the gradient
of the input, which along with compression, reduces the data
movement from the sensor by 10×. In addition, since the
ﬁrst layer of the DNN often outputs a gradient-like feature
map, it maybe possible to skip the computations in the ﬁrst
layer, which further reduces energy consumption as discussed
in [115, 116].
VII. CO-DESIGN OF DNN MODELS AND HARDWARE
In earlier work, the DNN models were designed to maximize
accuracy without much consideration of the implementation
complexity. However, this can lead to designs that are chal-
lenging to implement and deploy. To address this, recent
work has shown that DNN models and hardware can be co-
designed to jointly maximize accuracy and throughput, while
minimizing energy and cost, which increases the likelihood of
adoption. In this section, we will highlight various efforts that
have been made towards the co-design of DNN models and
hardware. Note that unlike Section V, the techniques discussed
in this section can affect the accuracy; thus, the goal is to
not only substantially reduce energy consumption and increase
throughput, but also to minimize any degradation in accuracy.
The co-design approaches can be loosely grouped into the
following categories:
• Reduce precision of operations and operands. This in-
cludes going from ﬂoating point to ﬁxed point, reducing
the bitwidth, non-linear quantization and weight sharing.
• Reduce number of operations and model size. This
includes techniques such as compression, pruning and
compact network architectures.
A. Reduce Precision
Quantization involves mapping data to a smaller set of
quantization levels. The ultimate goal is to minimize the error
between the reconstructed data from the quantization levels and
the original data. The number of quantization levels reﬂects the
precision and ultimately the number of bits required to represent
the data (usually log2 of the number of levels); thus, reduced
precision refers to reducing the number of levels, and thus
(a) Linear Quantization
(b) Log Quantization
(c) Non-Linear Quantization
Fig. 37. Various methods of quantization (Figures from [117, 118]).
the number of bits. The beneﬁts of reduced precision include
reduced storage cost and/or reduced computation requirements.
There are several ways to map the data to quantization levels.
The simplest method is a linear mapping with uniform distance
between each quantization level (Fig. 37(a)). Another approach
is to use a simple mapping function such as a log function
(Fig. 37(b)) where the distance between the levels varies; this
mapping can often be implemented with simple logic such as a
shift. Alternatively, a more complex mapping function can be
used where the quantization levels are determined or learned
from the data (Fig. 37(c)), e.g., using k-means clustering; for
this approach, the mapping is usually implemented with a look
up table.
Finally, the quantization can be ﬁxed (i.e., the same method
of quantization is used for all data types and layers, ﬁlters, and
channels in the network); or it can be variable (i.e., different
methods of quantization can be used for weights and activations,
and different layers, ﬁlters, and channels in the network).
Reduced precision research initially focused on reducing
the precision of the weights rather than the activations, since
weights directly increase the storage capacity requirement,
while the impact of activations on storage capacity depends on
the network architecture and dataﬂow. However, more recent
works have also started to look at the impact of quantization
on activations. Most reduced precision research also focuses
on reducing the precision for inference rather than training
(with some exceptions [88, 119, 120]) due to the sensitivity of
the gradients to quantization.
The key techniques used in recent work to reduce precision
are summarized in Table III; both linear and non-linear
quantization applied to weights and activations are explored.
The impact on accuracy is reported relative to a baseline
precision of 32-bit ﬂoating point, which is the default precision
used on platforms such as GPUs and CPUs.
1) Linear quantization: The ﬁrst step of reducing precision
is usually to convert values and operations from ﬂoating point
to ﬁxed point. A 32-bit ﬂoating point number, as shown in
Fig. 38(a), is represented by (−1)s × m × 2(e−127), where s
