5
Dog (0.7) 
Cat (0.1) 
Bike (0.02) 
Car (0.02) 
Plane (0.02) 
House (0.04) 
Machine 
Learning  
(Inference) 
Class Probabilities 
Fig. 6.
Example of an image classiﬁcation task. The machine learning
platform takes in an image and outputs the conﬁdence scores for a predeﬁned
set of classes.
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Human 
Accuracy (Top-5 error) 
AlexNet 
OverFeat 
GoogLeNet 
ResNet 
Clarifai 
VGG 
Large error rate reduction due to Deep CNN 
Fig. 7.
Results from the ImageNet Challenge [14].
improvements.
In conjunction with the trend to deep learning approaches
for the ImageNet Challenge, there has been a corresponding
increase in the number of entrants using GPUs. From 2012
when only 4 entrants used GPUs to 2014 when almost all
the entrants (110) were using them. This reﬂects the almost
complete switch from traditional computer vision approaches
to deep learning-based approaches for the competition.
In 2015, the ImageNet winning entry, ResNet [15], exceeded
human-level accuracy with a top-5 error rate4 below 5%. Since
then, the error rate has dropped below 3% and more focus
is now being placed on more challenging components of the
competition, such as object detection and localization. These
successes are clearly a contributing factor to the wide range
of applications to which DNNs are being applied.
E. Applications of DNN
Many applications can beneﬁt from DNNs ranging from
multimedia to medical space. In this section, we will provide
examples of areas where DNNs are currently making an impact
and highlight emerging areas where DNNs hope to make an
impact in the future.
• Image and Video Video is arguably the biggest of the
big data. It accounts for over 70% of today’s Internet
trafﬁc [16]. For instance, over 800 million hours of video
is collected daily worldwide for video surveillance [17].
Computer vision is necessary to extract meaningful infor-
mation from video. DNNs have signiﬁcantly improved the
accuracy of many computer vision tasks such as image
classiﬁcation [14], object localization and detection [18],
image segmentation [19], and action recognition [20].
4The top-5 error rate is measured based on whether the correct answer
appears in one of the top 5 categories selected by the algorithm.
• Speech and Language DNNs have signiﬁcantly improved
the accuracy of speech recognition [21] as well as many
related tasks such as machine translation [2], natural
language processing [22], and audio generation [23].
• Medical DNNs have played an important role in genomics
to gain insight into the genetics of diseases such as autism,
cancers, and spinal muscular atrophy [24–27]. They have
also been used in medical imaging to detect skin cancer [5],
brain cancer [28] and breast cancer [29].
• Game Play Recently, many of the grand AI challenges
involving game play have been overcome using DNNs.
These successes also required innovations in training
techniques and many rely on reinforcement learning [30].
DNNs have surpassed human level accuracy in playing
Atari [31] as well as Go [6], where an exhaustive search
of all possibilities is not feasible due to the unimaginably
huge number of possible moves.
• Robotics DNNs have been successful in the domain of
robotic tasks such as grasping with a robotic arm [32],
motion planning for ground robots [33], visual naviga-
tion [4, 34], control to stabilize a quadcopter [35] and
driving strategies for autonomous vehicles [36].
DNNs are already widely used in multimedia applications
today (e.g., computer vision, speech recognition). Looking
forward, we expect that DNNs will likely play an increasingly
important role in the medical and robotics ﬁelds, as discussed
above, as well as ﬁnance (e.g., for trading, energy forecasting,
and risk assessment), infrastructure (e.g., structural safety, and
trafﬁc control), weather forecasting and event detection [37].
The myriad application domains pose new challenges to the
efﬁcient processing of DNNs; the solutions then have to be
adaptive and scalable in order to handle the new and varied
forms of DNNs that these applications may employ.
F. Embedded versus Cloud
The various applications and aspects of DNN processing
(i.e., training versus inference) have different computational
needs. Speciﬁcally, training often requires a large dataset5 and
signiﬁcant computational resources for multiple weight-update
iterations. In many cases, training a DNN model still takes
several hours to multiple days and thus is typically performed
in the cloud. Inference, on the other hand, can happen either
in the cloud or at the edge (e.g., IoT or mobile).
In many applications, it is desirable to have the DNN
inference processing near the sensor. For instance, in computer
vision applications, such as measuring wait times in stores
or predicting trafﬁc patterns, it would be desirable to extract
meaningful information from the video right at the image
sensor rather than in the cloud to reduce the communication
cost. For other applications such as autonomous vehicles,
drone navigation and robotics, local processing is desired since
the latency and security risks of relying on the cloud are
too high. However, video involves a large amount of data,
which is computationally complex to process; thus, low cost
hardware to analyze video is challenging yet critical to enabling
5One of the major drawbacks of DNNs is their need for large datasets to
prevent over-ﬁtting during training.
