28
Metrics
Speciﬁcations
Eyeriss
Cost
Process Technology
65nm LP TSMC (1.0V)
Total Core Area (mm2)
12.25
Total On-chip Memory (kB)
192
Number of Multipliers
168
Core area
0.073
per Multiplier (mm2)
On-chip Memory
1.14
per Multiplier (kB)
Test Setup
Measured or Simulated
Measured
If Simulated, Syn or PnR
n/a
Accuracy
DNN Model
AlexNet
VGG-16
Top-5 error on ImageNet
19.8
8.8
Dense/Sparse
Dense
Dense
Supported Layers
All CONV layers
All CONV layers
Bits per Weight
16
16
Bits per Input Activation
16
16
Latency and Throughput
Batch Size
4
3
Run Time (msec)
115.3
4309.4
Power and Energy
Power (mW)
278
236
Off-chip Accesses
3.85
107.03
per Image Inference (MBytes)
Test Setup
Number of Images Tested
100
100
TABLE V
EXAMPLE BENCHMARK METRICS FOR EYERISS [94].
During the design-space exploration process, it is critical to
understand and balance the important system metrics. For DNN
computation these include the accuracy, energy, throughput
and hardware cost. Evaluating these metrics is, of course,
key, so this article surveys the important components of
a DNN workload. In speciﬁc, a DNN workload has two
major components. First, the workload is the form of each
DNN network including the ‘shape’ of each layer and the
interconnections between layers. These can vary both within
and between applications. Second, the workload consists of
the speciﬁc the data input to the DNN. This data will vary
with the input set used for training or the data input during
operation for inference.
This article also surveys a number of avenues that prior
work have taken to optimize DNN processing. Since data
movement dominates energy consumption, a primary focus
of some recent research has been to reduce data movement
while maintaining accuracy, throughput and cost. This means
selecting architectures with favorable memory hierarchies like
a spatial array, and developing dataﬂows that increase data
reuse at the low-cost levels of the memory hierarchy. We
have included a taxonomy of dataﬂows and an analysis of
their characteristics. Other work is presented that aims to save
space and energy by changing the representation of data values
in the DNN. Still other work saves energy and sometimes
increases throughput by exploiting the sparsity of weights
and/or activations.
The DNN domain also affords an excellent opportunity
for joint hardware/software co-design. For example, various
efforts have noted that efﬁciency can be improved by increasing
sparsity (increasing the number of zero values) or optimizing
the representation of data by reducing the precision of values
or using more complex mappings of the stored value to the
actual value used for computation. However, to avoid losing
accuracy it is often useful to modify the network or ﬁne-tune the
network’s weights to accommodate these changes. Thus, this
article both reviews a variety of these techniques and discusses
the frameworks that are available for describing, running and
training networks.
Finally, DNNs afford the opportunity to use mixed-signal
circuit design and advanced technologies to improve efﬁciency.
These include using memristors for analog computation and 3-D
stacked memory. Advanced technologies can also can facilitate
moving computation closer to the source by embedding compu-
tation near or within the sensor and the memories. Of course, all
of these techniques should also be considered in combination,
while being careful to understand their interactions and looking
for opportunities for joint hardware/algorithm co-optimization.
In conclusion, although much work has been done, deep
neural networks remain an important area of research with
many promising applications and opportunities for innovation
at various levels of hardware design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding provided by DARPA YFA, MIT CICS, and gifts
from Nvidia and Intel. The authors thank the anonymous
reviewers as well as James Noraky, Mehul Tikekar and
Zhengdong Zhang for providing valuable feedback on this
paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature,
vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, May 2015.
[2] L. Deng, J. Li, J.-T. Huang, K. Yao, D. Yu, F. Seide, M. Seltzer,
G. Zweig, X. He, J. Williams et al., “Recent advances in deep
learning for speech research at Microsoft,” in ICASSP, 2013.
[3] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet
Classiﬁcation with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” in
NIPS, 2012.
[4] C. Chen, A. Seff, A. Kornhauser, and J. Xiao, “Deepdriving:
Learning affordance for direct perception in autonomous
driving,” in ICCV, 2015.
[5] A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M. Swetter, H. M.
Blau, and S. Thrun, “Dermatologist-level classiﬁcation of skin
