3
Neurons 
(activations) 
Synapses 
(weights) 
(a) Neurons and synapses
X1 
X2 
X3 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
W11 
W34 
L1 Input Neurons 
(e.g. image pixels) 
Layer 1 
L1 Output Neurons 
a.k.a. Activations 
Layer 2 
L2 Output Neurons 
(b) Compute weighted sum for each layer
Fig. 3.
Simple neural network example and terminology (Figure adopted
from [7]).
Fig. 3(a) shows a diagrammatic picture of a computational
neural network. The neurons in the input layer receive some
values and propagate them to the neurons in the middle layer
of the network, which is also frequently called a ‘hidden
layer’. The weighted sums from one or more hidden layers are
ultimately propagated to the output layer, which presents the
ﬁnal outputs of the network to the user. To align brain-inspired
terminology with neural networks, the outputs of the neurons
are often referred to as activations, and the synapses are often
referred to as weights as shown in Fig. 3(a). We will use the
activation/weight nomenclature in this article.
Fig. 3(b) shows an example of the computation at each
layer: yj = f(
3P
i=1
Wij × xi + b), where Wij, xi and yj are the
weights, input activations and output activations, respectively,
and f(·) is a non-linear function described in Section III-A1.
The bias term b is omitted from Fig. 3(b) for simplicity.
Within the domain of neural networks, there is an area called
deep learning, in which the neural networks have more than
three layers, i.e., more than one hidden layer. Today, the typical
numbers of network layers used in deep learning range from
ﬁve to more than a thousand. In this article, we will generally
use the terminology deep neural networks (DNNs) to refer to
the neural networks used in deep learning.
DNNs are capable of learning high-level features with more
complexity and abstraction than shallower neural networks. An
example that demonstrates this point is using DNNs to process
visual data. In these applications, pixels of an image are fed into
the ﬁrst layer of a DNN, and the outputs of that layer can be
interpreted as representing the presence of different low-level
features in the image, such as lines and edges. At subsequent
layers, these features are then combined into a measure of the
likely presence of higher level features, e.g., lines are combined
into shapes, which are further combined into sets of shapes.
And ﬁnally, given all this information, the network provides a
probability that these high-level features comprise a particular
object or scene. This deep feature hierarchy enables DNNs to
achieve superior performance in many tasks.
C. Inference versus Training
Since DNNs are an instance of a machine learning algorithm,
the basic program does not change as it learns to perform its
given tasks. In the speciﬁc case of DNNs, this learning involves
determining the value of the weights (and bias) in the network,
backpropagation 
∂L
∂y4
∂L
∂y1
∂L
∂y2
∂L
∂y3
W11 
W34 
∂L
∂x1
∂L
∂x2
∂L
∂x3
(a) Compute the gradient of the loss
relative to the ﬁlter inputs
backpropagation 
∂L
∂y4
∂L
∂y1
∂L
∂y2
∂L
∂y3
X1 
X3 
∂L
∂w34
∂L
∂w11
…….. 
(b) Compute the gradient of the loss
relative to the weights
Fig. 4.
An example of backpropagation through a neural network.
and is referred to as training the network. Once trained, the
program can perform its task by computing the output of
the network using the weights determined during the training
process. Running the program with these weights is referred
to as inference.
In this section, we will use image classiﬁcation, as shown
in Fig. 6, as a driving example for training and using a DNN.
When we perform inference using a DNN, we give an input
image and the output of the DNN is a vector of scores, one for
each object class; the class with the highest score indicates the
most likely class of object in the image. The overarching goal
for training a DNN is to determine the weights that maximize
the score of the correct class and minimize the scores of the
incorrect classes. When training the network the correct class
is often known because it is given for the images used for
training (i.e., the training set of the network). The gap between
the ideal correct scores and the scores computed by the DNN
based on its current weights is referred to as the loss (L).
Thus the goal of training DNNs is to ﬁnd a set of weights to
minimize the average loss over a large training set.
When training a network, the weights (wij) are usually
updated using a hill-climbing optimization process called
gradient descent. A multiple of the gradient of the loss relative
to each weight, which is the partial derivative of the loss with
respect to the weight, is used to update the weight (i.e., updated
wt+1
ij
= wt
ij −α ∂L
∂wij , where α is called the learning rate). Note
that this gradient indicates how the weights should change in
order to reduce the loss. The process is repeated iteratively to
reduce the overall loss.
An efﬁcient way to compute the partial derivatives of
the gradient is through a process called backpropagation.
Backpropagation, which is a computation derived from the
chain rule of calculus, operates by passing values backwards
through the network to compute how the loss is affected by
each weight.
This backpropagation computation is, in fact, very similar
in form to the computation used for inference as shown
in Fig. 4 [10].2 Thus, techniques for efﬁciently performing
2To backpropagate through each ﬁlter: (1) compute the gradient of the loss
relative to the weights from the ﬁlter inputs (i.e., the forward activations) and
the gradients of the loss relative to the ﬁlter outputs; (2) compute the gradient
of the loss relative to the ﬁlter inputs from the ﬁlter weights and the gradients
of the loss relative to the ﬁlter outputs.
