1
Efﬁcient Processing of Deep Neural Networks:
A Tutorial and Survey
Vivienne Sze, Senior Member, IEEE, Yu-Hsin Chen, Student Member, IEEE, Tien-Ju Yang, Student
Member, IEEE, Joel Emer, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Deep neural networks (DNNs) are currently widely
used for many artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications including
computer vision, speech recognition, and robotics. While DNNs
deliver state-of-the-art accuracy on many AI tasks, it comes at the
cost of high computational complexity. Accordingly, techniques
that enable efﬁcient processing of DNNs to improve energy
efﬁciency and throughput without sacriﬁcing application accuracy
or increasing hardware cost are critical to the wide deployment
of DNNs in AI systems.
This article aims to provide a comprehensive tutorial and
survey about the recent advances towards the goal of enabling
efﬁcient processing of DNNs. Speciﬁcally, it will provide an
overview of DNNs, discuss various hardware platforms and
architectures that support DNNs, and highlight key trends in
reducing the computation cost of DNNs either solely via hardware
design changes or via joint hardware design and DNN algorithm
changes. It will also summarize various development resources
that enable researchers and practitioners to quickly get started
in this ﬁeld, and highlight important benchmarking metrics and
design considerations that should be used for evaluating the
rapidly growing number of DNN hardware designs, optionally
including algorithmic co-designs, being proposed in academia
and industry.
The reader will take away the following concepts from this
article: understand the key design considerations for DNNs; be
able to evaluate different DNN hardware implementations with
benchmarks and comparison metrics; understand the trade-offs
between various hardware architectures and platforms; be able to
evaluate the utility of various DNN design techniques for efﬁcient
processing; and understand recent implementation trends and
opportunities.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are currently the foundation
for many modern artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications [1].
Since the breakthrough application of DNNs to speech recogni-
tion [2] and image recognition [3], the number of applications
that use DNNs has exploded. These DNNs are employed in a
myriad of applications from self-driving cars [4], to detecting
cancer [5] to playing complex games [6]. In many of these
domains, DNNs are now able to exceed human accuracy. The
superior performance of DNNs comes from its ability to extract
high-level features from raw sensory data after using statistical
learning over a large amount of data to obtain an effective
V. Sze, Y.-H. Chen and T.-J. Yang are with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. (e-mail: sze@mit.edu; yhchen@mit.edu,
tjy@mit.edu)
J. S. Emer is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA,
and also with Nvidia Corporation, Westford, MA 01886 USA. (e-mail:
jsemer@mit.edu)
representation of an input space. This is different from earlier
approaches that use hand-crafted features or rules designed by
experts.
The superior accuracy of DNNs, however, comes at the
cost of high computational complexity. While general-purpose
compute engines, especially graphics processing units (GPUs),
have been the mainstay for much DNN processing, increasingly
there is interest in providing more specialized acceleration of
the DNN computation. This article aims to provide an overview
of DNNs, the various tools for understanding their behavior,
and the techniques being explored to efﬁciently accelerate their
computation.
This paper is organized as follows:
• Section II provides background on the context of why
DNNs are important, their history and applications.
• Section III gives an overview of the basic components of
DNNs and popular DNN models currently in use.
• Section IV describes the various resources used for DNN
research and development.
• Section V describes the various hardware platforms used
to process DNNs and the various optimizations used
to improve throughput and energy efﬁciency without
impacting application accuracy (i.e., produce bit-wise
identical results).
• Section VI discusses how mixed-signal circuits and new
memory technologies can be used for near-data processing
to address the expensive data movement that dominates
throughput and energy consumption of DNNs.
• Section VII describes various joint algorithm and hardware
optimizations that can be performed on DNNs to improve
both throughput and energy efﬁciency while trying to
minimize impact on accuracy.
• Section VIII describes the key metrics that should be
considered when comparing various DNN designs.
II. BACKGROUND ON DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS (DNN)
In this section, we describe the position of DNNs in the
context of AI in general and some of the concepts that motivated
its development. We will also present a brief chronology of
the major steps in its history, and some current domains to
which it is being applied.
A. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and DNNs
DNNs, also referred to as deep learning, are a part of
the broad ﬁeld of AI, which is the science and engineering
of creating intelligent machines that have the ability to
arXiv:1703.09039v2  [cs.CV]  13 Aug 2017
