19
0.02
0.04
0.06
WLDAC Code
ΔVBL (V)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Ideal transfer curve
Nominal transfer curve
Standard Deviation  
(from Monte Carlo 
simulations) 
IBC 
WLDAC  
code 
ΔVBL 
(a) Multiplication performed by bit-cell
(Figure from [102])
V1 
G1 
I1 = V1×G1 
V2 
G2 
I2 = V2×G2 
I = I1 + I2  
= V1×G1 + V2×G2 
(b) Gi is conductance of resistive
memory (Figure from [104])
Fig. 36.
Analog computation by (a) SRAM bit-cell and (b) non-volatile
resistive memory.
closer together. Tetris [101] explores the use of HMC with
the Eyeriss spatial architecture and row stationary dataﬂow.
It proposes allocating more area to computation than on-chip
memory (i.e., larger PE array and smaller global buffer) in
order to exploit the low energy and high throughput properties
of the HMC. It also adapts the dataﬂow to account for the
HMC memory and smaller on-chip memory. Tetris achieves
a 1.5× reduction in energy consumption and 4.1× increase
in throughput over a baseline system with conventional 2-D
DRAM.
B. SRAM
Rather than bringing the memory near the compute, recent
work has also investigated bringing the compute into the
memory. For instance, the multiply and accumulate operation
can be directly integrated into the bit-cells of an SRAM
array [102], as shown in Fig. 36(a). In this work, a 5-bit
DAC is used to drive the word line (WL) to an analog voltage
that represents the feature vector, while the bit-cells store the
binary weights ±1. The bit-cell current (IBC) is effectively
a product of the value of the feature vector and the value of
the weight stored in the bit-cell; the currents from the bit-
cells within a column add together to discharge the bitline
(VBL). This approach gives 12× energy savings compared to
reading the 1-bit weights from the SRAM and performing the
computation separately. To counter circuit non-idealities, the
DAC accounts for the non-linear bit-line discharge with respect
to the WL voltage, and boosting is used to combine the weak
classiﬁers that are susceptible to device variations to form a
strong classiﬁer [103].
C. Non-volatile Resistive Memories
The multiply and accumulate operation can also be directly
integrated into advanced non-volatile high density memories
by using them as programmable resistive elements, commonly
referred to as memristors [105]. Speciﬁcally, a multiplication
is performed with the resistor’s conductance as the weight, the
voltage as the input, and the current as the output as shown in
Fig. 36(b). The addition is done by summing the currents of
different memristors with Kirchhoff’s current law. This is the
ultimate form of a weight stationary dataﬂow, as the weights
are always held in place. The advantages of this approach
include reduced energy consumption since the computation
is embedded within memory which reduces data movement,
and increased density since memory and computation can be
densely packed with a similar density to DRAM [106].8
There are several popular candidates for non-volatile resistive
memory devices including phase change memory (PCM),
resistive RAM (RRAM or ReRAM), conductive bridge RAM
(CBRAM), and spin transfer torque magnetic RAM (STT-
MRAM) [107]. These devices have different trade-offs in terms
of endurance (i.e., how many times it can be written), retention
time, write current, density (i.e., cell size), variations and speed.
Processing with non-volatile resistive memories has several
drawbacks as described in [108]. First, it suffers from the
reduced precision and ADC/DAC overhead of analog process-
ing described earlier. Second, the array size is limited by the
wires that connect the resistive devices; speciﬁcally, wire energy
dominates for large arrays (e.g., 1k×1k), and the IR drop along
wire can degrade the read accuracy. Third, the write energy
to program the resistive devices can be costly, in some cases
requiring multiple pulses. Finally, the resistive devices can also
suffer from device-to-device and cycle-to-cycle variations with
non-linear conductance across the conductance range.
There have been several recent works that explore the use of
memristors for DNNs. ISAAC [104] replaces the eDRAM in
DaDianNao with memristors. To address the limited precision
support, ISAAC computes a 16-bit dot product operation with
8 memristors each storing 2-bits; a 1-bit×2-bit multiplication
is performed at each memristor, where a 16-bit input requires
16 cycles to complete. In other words, the ISAAC architecture
trades off area and time for increased precision. Finally, ISAAC
arranges its 25.1M memristors in a hierarchical structure to
avoid issues with large arrays. PRIME [109] also replaces the
DRAM main memory with memristors; speciﬁcally, it uses
256×256 memristor arrays that can be conﬁgured for 4-bit
multi-level cell computation or 1-bit single level cell storage.
It should be noted that results from ISAAC and PRIME are
obtained from simulations. The task of actually fabricating
large memristors arrays is still very much a research challenge;
for instance, [110] uses a fabricated 12×12 memristor array
to demonstrate a linear classiﬁer.
D. Sensors
In certain applications, such as image processing, the data
movement from the sensor itself can account for a signiﬁcant
portion of the system energy consumption. Thus there has
also been research on performing the computation as close
as possible to the sensor. In particular, much of the work
focuses on moving the computation into the analog domain to
avoid using the ADC within the sensor, which accounts for a
signiﬁcant portion of the sensor power. However, as mentioned
8The resistive devices can be inserted between the cross-point of two wires
and in certain cases can avoid the need for an access transistor.
