10
that are more discriminative and also provides more levels
of hierarchy in the learned representation [15, 50, 51, 55].
The number of ﬁlter shapes continues to vary across layers,
thus ﬂexibility is still important. Furthermore, most of the
computation has been placed on CONV layers rather than FC
layers. In addition, the number of weights in the FC layers is
reduced and in most recent networks (since GoogLeNet) the
CONV layers also dominate in terms of weights. Thus, the
focus of hardware implementations should be on addressing
the efﬁciency of the CONV layers, which in many domains
are increasingly important.
IV. DNN DEVELOPMENT RESOURCES
One of the key factors that has enabled the rapid development
of DNNs is the set of development resources that have been
made available by the research community and industry. These
resources are also key to the development of DNN accelerators
by providing characterizations of the workloads and facilitating
the exploration of trade-offs in model complexity and accuracy.
This section will describe these resources such that those who
are interested in this ﬁeld can quickly get started.
A. Frameworks
For ease of DNN development and to enable sharing of
trained networks, several deep learning frameworks have been
developed from various sources. These open source libraries
contain software libraries for DNNs. Caffe was made available
in 2014 from UC Berkeley [46]. It supports C, C++, Python
and MATLAB. Tensorﬂow was released by Google in 2015,
and supports C++ and python; it also supports multiple CPUs
and GPUs and has more ﬂexibility than Caffe, with the
computation expressed as dataﬂow graphs to manage the
tensors (multidimensional arrays). Another popular framework
is Torch, which was developed by Facebook and NYU and
supports C, C++ and Lua. There are several other frameworks
such as Theano, MXNet, CNTK, which are described in [60].
There are also higher-level libraries that can run on top of
the aforementioned frameworks to provide a more universal
experience and faster development. One example of such
libraries is Keras, which is written in Python and supports
Tensorﬂow, CNTK and Theano.
The existence of such frameworks are not only a convenient
aid for DNN researchers and application designers, but they
are also invaluable for engineering high performance or more
efﬁcient DNN computation engines. In particular, because the
frameworks make heavy use of a set primitive operations,
such processing of a CONV layer, they can incorporate use of
optimized software or hardware accelerators. This acceleration
is transparent to the user of the framework. Thus, for example,
most frameworks can use Nvidia’s cuDNN library for rapid
execution on Nvidia GPUs. Similarly, transparent incorporation
of dedicated hardware accelerators can be achieved as was
done with the Eyeriss chip [61].
Finally, these frameworks are a valuable source of workloads
for hardware researchers. They can be used to drive experi-
mental designs for different workloads, for proﬁling different
workloads and for exploring hardware-software trade-offs.
B. Models
Pretrained DNN models can be downloaded from various
websites [56–59] for the various different frameworks. It should
be noted that even for the same DNN (e.g., AlexNet) the
accuracy of these models can vary by around 1% to 2%
depending on how the model was trained, and thus the results
do not always exactly match the original publication.
C. Popular Datasets for Classiﬁcation
It is important to factor in the difﬁculty of the task when
comparing different DNN models. For instance, the task of
classifying handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset [62]
is much simpler than classifying an object into one of 1000
classes as is required for the ImageNet dataset [14](Fig. 16).
It is expected that the size of the DNNs (i.e., number of
weights) and the number of MACs will be larger for the more
difﬁcult task than the simpler task and thus require more
energy and have lower throughput. For instance, LeNet-5[48]
is designed for digit classiﬁcation, while AlexNet[3], VGG-
16[50], GoogLeNet[51], and ResNet[15] are designed for the
1000-class image classiﬁcation.
There are many AI tasks that come with publicly available
datasets in order to evaluate the accuracy of a given DNN.
Public datasets are important for comparing the accuracy of
different approaches. The simplest and most common task
is image classiﬁcation, which involves being given an entire
image, and selecting 1 of N classes that the image most likely
belongs to. There is no localization or detection.
MNIST is a widely used dataset for digit classiﬁcation
that was introduced in 1998 [62]. It consists of 28×28 pixel
grayscale images of handwritten digits. There are 10 classes
(for 10 digits) and 60,000 training images and 10,000 test
images. LeNet-5 was able to achieve an accuracy of 99.05%
when MNIST was ﬁrst introduced. Since then the accuracy has
increased to 99.79% using regularization of neural networks
with dropconnect [63]. Thus, MNIST is now considered a fairly
easy dataset.
CIFAR is a dataset that consists of 32×32 pixel colored
images of of various objects, which was released in 2009 [64].
CIFAR is a subset of the 80 million Tiny Image dataset [65].
CIFAR-10 is composed of 10 mutually exclusive classes. There
are 50,000 training images (5000 per class) and 10,000 test
images (1000 per class). A two-layer convolutional deep belief
network was able to achieve 64.84% accuracy on CIFAR-10
when it was ﬁrst introduced [66]. Since then the accuracy has
increased to 96.53% using fractional max pooling [67].
ImageNet is a large scale image dataset that was ﬁrst
introduced in 2010; the dataset stabilized in 2012 [14]. It
contains images of 256×256 pixel in color with 1000 classes.
The classes are deﬁned using the WordNet as a backbone to
handle ambiguous word meanings and to combine together
synonyms into the same object category. In otherwords, there
is a hierarchy for the ImageNet categories. The 1000 classes
were selected such that there is no overlap in the ImageNet
hierarchy. The ImageNet dataset contains many ﬁne-grained
categories including 120 different breeds of dogs. There are
1.3M training images (732 to 1300 per class), 100,000 testing
