4
inference can sometimes be useful for performing training.
It is, however, important to note a couple of points. First,
backpropagation requires intermediate outputs of the network
to be preserved for the backwards computation, thus training
has increased storage requirements. Second, due to the gradients
use for hill-climbing, the precision requirement for training
is generally higher than inference. Thus many of the reduced
precision techniques discussed in Section VII are limited to
inference only.
A variety of techniques are used to improve the efﬁciency
and robustness of training. For example, often the loss from
multiple sets of input data, i.e., a batch, are collected before a
single pass of weight update is performed; this helps to speed
up and stabilize the training process.
There are multiple ways to train the weights. The most
common approach, as described above, is called supervised
learning, where all the training samples are labeled (e.g., with
the correct class). Unsupervised learning is another approach
where all the training samples are not labeled and essentially
the goal is to ﬁnd the structure or clusters in the data. Semi-
supervised learning falls in between the two approaches where
only a small subset of the training data is labeled (e.g., use
unlabeled data to deﬁne the cluster boundaries, and use the
small amount of labeled data to label the clusters). Finally,
reinforcement learning can be used to the train weights such
that given the state of the current environment, the DNN can
output what action the agent should take next to maximize
expected rewards; however, the rewards might not be available
immediately after an action, but instead only after a series of
actions.
Another commonly used approach to determine weights is
ﬁne-tuning, where previously-trained weights are available and
are used as a starting point and then those weights are adjusted
for a new dataset (e.g., transfer learning) or for a new constraint
(e.g., reduced precision). This results in faster training than
starting from a random starting point, and can sometimes result
in better accuracy.
This article will focus on the efﬁcient processing of DNN
inference rather than training, since DNN inference is often
performed on embedded devices (rather than the cloud) where
resources are limited as discussed in more details later.
D. Development History
Although neural nets were proposed in the 1940s, the ﬁrst
practical application employing multiple digital neurons didn’t
appear until the late 1980s with the LeNet network for hand-
written digit recognition [11]3. Such systems are widely used
by ATMs for digit recognition on checks. However, the early
2010s have seen a blossoming of DNN-based applications with
highlights such as Microsoft’s speech recognition system in
2011 [2] and the AlexNet system for image recognition in
2012 [3]. A brief chronology of deep learning is shown in
Fig. 5.
The deep learning successes of the early 2010s are believed
to be a conﬂuence of three factors. The ﬁrst factor is the
3In the early 1960s, single analog neuron systems were used for adaptive
ﬁltering [12, 13].
DNN Timeline
• 1940s - Neural networks were proposed
• 1960s - Deep neural networks were proposed
• 1989 - Neural networks for recognizing digits (LeNet)
• 1990s - Hardware for shallow neural nets (Intel ETANN)
• 2011 - Breakthrough DNN-based speech recognition
(Microsoft)
• 2012 - DNNs for vision start supplanting hand-crafted
approaches (AlexNet)
• 2014+ - Rise of DNN accelerator research (Neuﬂow,
DianNao...)
Fig. 5. A concise history of neural networks. ’Deep’ refers to the number of
layers in the network.
amount of available information to train the networks. To learn
a powerful representation (rather than using a hand-crafted
approach) requires a large amount of training data. For example,
Facebook receives over 350 millions images per day, Walmart
creates 2.5 Petabytes of customer data hourly and YouTube
has 300 hours of video uploaded every minute. As a result,
the cloud providers and many businesses have a huge amount
of data to train their algorithms.
The second factor is the amount of compute capacity
available. Semiconductor device and computer architecture
advances have continued to provide increased computing
capability, and we appear to have crossed a threshold where the
large amount of weighted sum computation in DNNs, which
is required for both inference and training, can be performed
in a reasonable amount of time.
The successes of these early DNN applications opened the
ﬂoodgates of algorithmic development. It has also inspired the
development of several (largely open source) frameworks that
make it even easier for researchers and practitioners to explore
and use DNNs. Combining these efforts contributes to the third
factor, which is the evolution of the algorithmic techniques that
have improved application accuracy signiﬁcantly and broadened
the domains to which DNNs are being applied.
An excellent example of the successes in deep learning can
be illustrated with the ImageNet Challenge [14]. This challenge
is a contest involving several different components. One of the
components is an image classiﬁcation task where algorithms
are given an image and they must identify what is in the image,
as shown in Fig. 6. The training set consists of 1.2 million
images, each of which is labeled with one of 1000 object
categories that the image contains. For the evaluation phase,
the algorithm must accurately identify objects in a test set of
images, which it hasn’t previously seen.
Fig. 7 shows the performance of the best entrants in the
ImageNet contest over a number of years. One sees that
the accuracy of the algorithms initially had an error rate
of 25% or more. In 2012, a group from the University of
Toronto used graphics processing units (GPUs) for their high
compute capability and a deep neural network approach, named
AlexNet, and dropped the error rate by approximately 10% [3].
Their accomplishment inspired an outpouring of deep learning
style algorithms that have resulted in a steady stream of
