22
reduces the MAC to an XNOR. However, BC and BNN have
an accuracy loss of 19% and 29.8%, respectively [129].
In order to reduce this accuracy loss, Binary Weight
Nets (BWN) and XNOR-Nets introduced several signiﬁcant
modiﬁcations to the DNN processing [129]. This includes
multiplying the outputs with a scale factor to recover the
dynamic range (i.e., the weights effectively become -w and
w, where w is the average of the absolute values of the
weights in the ﬁlter)9, keeping the ﬁrst and last layers at 32-bit
ﬂoating point precision, and performing normalization before
convolution to reduce the dynamic range of the activations.
With these changes, BWN reduced the accuracy loss to 0.8%,
while XNOR-Nets reduced the loss to 11%. The loss of XNOR-
Net can be further reduced by increasing the precision of the
activations to be slightly larger than one bit. For instance,
Quantized Neural Networks (QNN) [119], DoReFa-Net [120],
and HWGQ-Net [130] allow the activations to have 2-bits,
while the weights remain at 1-bit; in HWGQ-Net, this reduces
the accuracy loss to 5.2%.
All the previously described binary nets limit the weights
to two values (-w and w); however, there may be beneﬁts
for allowing weights to be zero (i.e., -w, 0, w). Although
this requires an additional bit per weight compared to binary
weights, the sparsity of the weights can be exploited to reduce
computation and storage cost, which can potentially cancel
out the cost of the additional bit. This is explored in Ternary
Weight Nets (TWN) [131] and then extended in Trained Ternary
Quantization (TTQ) where a different scale is trained for each
weight (i.e., -w1, 0, w2) for an accuracy loss of 0.6% [132],
assuming 32-bit ﬂoating point for the activations.
Hardware implementations for binary/ternary nets have
been explored in recent publications. YodaNN [133] uses
binary weights, while BRein [134] uses binary weights and
activations. Binary weights are also used in the compute
in SRAM work [102] described in Section VI. Finally, the
nominally spike-inspired TrueNorth chip can implement a
reduced precision neural network with binary activations and
ternary weights using TrueNorth’s quantized weight table [9].
These works tend not to support state-of-the-art DNN models
(with the exception of YodaNN).
2) Non-linear quantization: The previous works described
involve linear quantization where the levels are uniformly
spaced out. It has been shown that the distributions of the
weights and activations are not uniform [118, 135], and thus
a non-linear quantization can potentially improve accuracy.
Speciﬁcally, there have been two popular approaches taken
in recent works: (1) log domain quantization; (2) learned
quantization or weight sharing.
Log domain quantization If the quantization levels are
assigned based on a logarithmic distribution as shown in
Fig 37(b), the weights and activations are more equally
distributed across the different levels and each level is used
more efﬁciently resulting in less quantization error. For instance,
using 4 bits in linear quantization results in a 27.8% loss in
accuracy versus a 5% loss for log base-2 quantization for
9This can also be thought of as a form of weights sharing, where only two
weights are used per ﬁlter.
Weight 
Decoder/
Dequant 
U x 16b 
Weight  
index 
(log2U-bits) 
Weight  
(16-bits) 
Weight  
Memory 
CRSM x 
log2U-bits 
Output 
Activation 
(16-bits) 
  
  
    
MAC 
Input 
Activation  
(16-bits) 
Fig. 40.
Weight sharing hardware.
VGG-16 [117]. Furthermore, when weights are quantized to
powers of two, the multiplication can be replaced with a bit-
shift [122, 135].10 Incremental Network Quantization (INQ)
can be used to further reduce the loss in accuracy by dividing
the large and small weights into different groups, and then
iteratively quantizing and re-training the weights [136].
Weight Sharing forces several weights to share a single value.
This reduces the number of unique weights in a ﬁlter or a
layer. One example is to group the weights by using a hashing
function and use one value for each group [137]. Alternatively,
the weights can be grouped by the k-means algorithm [118].
Both the shared weights and the indexes indicating which
weight to use at each position of the ﬁlter are stored. This
leads to a two step process to fetch the weight: (1) read the
weight index; (2) using the weight index, read the shared
weights. This approach can reduce the cost of reading and
storing the weights if the weight index (log2 of the number of
unique weights) is less than the bitwidth of the weight itself.
For instance, in Deep Compression [118], the number of
unique weights per layer is reduced to 256 for convolutional
layers and 16 for fully-connected layers in AlexNet, requiring
8-bit and 4-bit weight indexes, respectively. Assuming there
are U unique weights and the size of the ﬁlters in the layer
is C×R×S×M from Fig. 9(b), there will be energy savings
if reading from a CRSM × log2U-bit memory plus a U×16-
bit memory (as shown in Fig. 40) cost less than reading
from a CRSM×16-bit memory. Note that unlike the previous
quantization methods, the weight sharing approach does not
reduce the precision of the MAC computation itself and only
reduces the weight storage requirement.
B. Reduce Number of Operations and Model Size
In addition to reducing the size of each operation or operand
(weight/activation), there is also a signiﬁcant amount of research
on methods to reduce the number of operations and model
size. These techniques can be loosely classiﬁed as exploiting
activation statistics, network pruning, network architecture
design and knowledge distillation.
1) Exploiting Activation Statistics: As discussed in Sec-
tion III-A1, ReLU is a popular form of non-linearity used in
DNNs that sets all negative values to zero as shown in Fig. 41(a).
As a result, the output activations of the feature maps after the
ReLU are sparse; for instance, the feature maps in AlexNet
have sparsity between 19% to 63% as shown in Fig. 41(b).
This sparsity gives ReLU an implementation advantage over
other non-linearities such as sigmoid, etc.
10Note however that multiplications do not account for a signiﬁcant portion
of the total energy.
