25
layers in a compressed format. It uses an input stationary
dataﬂow to deliver the compressed weights and activations to
a multiplier array followed by a scatter network to add the
scattered partial sums.
Recent works have also explored the use of structured
pruning to avoid the need for custom hardware [147, 148].
Rather than pruning individual weights (also referred to as ﬁne-
grained pruning), structured pruning involves pruning groups
of weights (also referred to as coarse-grained pruning). The
beneﬁts of structured pruning are (1) the resulting weights can
better align with the data-parallel architecture (e.g., SIMD)
found in existing general purpose hardware, which results in
more efﬁcient processing [149]; (2) it amortizes the overhead
cost required to signal the location of the non-zero weights
across a group of weights, which improves compression and
thus reduces storage cost. These groups of weights can include
a pair of neighboring weights, an entire row or column of a
ﬁlter, an entire channel of a ﬁlter or the entire ﬁlter itself; using
larger groups tends to result in higher loss in accuracy [150].
3) Compact Network Architectures: The number of weights
and operations can also be reduced by improving the network
architecture itself. The trend is to replace a large ﬁlter with a
series of smaller ﬁlters, which have fewer weights in total; when
the ﬁlters are applied sequentially, they achieve the same overall
effective receptive ﬁeld (i.e., the region the ﬁlter uses from input
image to compute an output). This approach can be applied
during the network architecture design (before training) or by
decomposing the ﬁlters of a trained network (after training).
The latter one avoids the hassle of training networks from
scratch. However, it is less ﬂexible than the former one. For
example, existing methods can only decompose a ﬁlter in a
trained network into a series of ﬁlters without non-linearity
between them.
a) Before Training: In recent DNN models, ﬁlters with
a smaller width and height are used more frequently because
concatenating several of them can emulate a larger ﬁlter as
shown in Fig. 13. For example, one 5×5 convolution can be
replaced with two 3×3 convolutions. Alternatively, one N×N
convolution can be decomposed into two 1-D convolutions, one
1×N and one N×1 convolution [53]; this basically imposes
a restriction that the 2-D ﬁlter must be separable, which is
a common constraint in image processing [151]. Similarly, a
3-D convolution can be replaced by a set of 2-D convolutions
(i.e., applied only on one of the input channels) followed by
1×1 3-D convolutions as demonstrated in Xception [152] and
MobileNets [153]. The order of the 2-D convolutions and 1×1
3-D convolutions can be switched.
1×1 convolutional layers can also be used to reduce the
number of channels in the output feature map for a given
layer, which reduces the number of ﬁlter channels and thus
computation cost for the ﬁlters in the next layer as demonstrated
in [15, 51, 52]; this is often referred to as a ‘bottleneck’ as
discussed in Section III-B. For this purpose, the number of 1×1
ﬁlters has to be less than the number of channels in the 1×1
ﬁlter. For example, 32 ﬁlters of 1×1×64 can transform an input
with 64 channels to an output of 32 channels and reduce the
number of ﬁlter channels in the next layer to 32. SqueezeNet
uses many 1×1 ﬁlters to aggressively reduce the number of
weights [154]. It proposes a ﬁre module that ﬁrst ‘squeezes’
the network with 1×1 convolution ﬁlters and then expands
it with multiple 1×1 and 3×3 convolution ﬁlters. It achieves
an overall 50× reduction in number of weights compared to
AlexNet, while maintaining the same accuracy. It should be
noted, however, that reducing the number of weights does not
necessarily reduce energy; for instance, SqueezeNet consumes
more energy than AlexNet, as shown in Fig. 43(a).
b) After Training: Tensor decomposition can be used to
decompose ﬁlters in a trained network without impacting the
accuracy. It treats weights in a layer as a 4-D tensor and breaks
it into a combination of smaller tensors (i.e., several layers).
Low-rank approximation can then be applied to further increase
the compression rate at the cost of accuracy degradation, which
can be restored by ﬁne-tuning the weights.
This approach is demonstrated using Canonical Polyadic (CP)
decomposition, a high-order extension of singular value decom-
position that can be solved by various methods, such as a greedy
algorithm [155] or a non-linear least-square method [156].
Combining CP-decomposition with low-rank approximation
achieves a 4.5× speed-up on CPUs [156]. However, CP-
decomposition cannot be computed in a numerically stable
way when the dimension of the tensor, which represents the
weights, is larger than two [156]. To alleviate this problem,
Tucker decomposition is adopted instead in [157].
4) Knowledge Distillation: Using a deep network or av-
eraging the predictions of different models (i.e., ensemble)
gives a better accuracy than using a single shallower network.
However, the computational complexity is also higher. To get
the best of both worlds, knowledge distillation transfers the
knowledge learned by the complex model (teacher) to the
simpler model (student). The student network can therefore
achieve an accuracy that would be unachievable if it was
directly trained with the same dataset [158, 159]. For example,
[160] shows how using knowledge distillation can improve the
speech recognition accuracy of a student net by 2%, which is
similar to the accuracy of a teacher net that is composed of
an ensemble of 10 networks.
Fig.
45
shows
the
simplest
knowledge
distillation
method [158]. The softmax layer is commonly used as the
output layer in the image classiﬁcation networks to generate
the class probabilities from the class scores12; it squashes the
class scores into values between 0 and 1 that sum up to 1.
For this knowledge distillation method, soft targets (values
between 0 and 1) such as the class scores of the teacher DNN
(or an ensemble of teacher DNNs) are used instead of the
hard targets (values of either 0 or 1) such as the labels in the
dataset. The objective is to minimize the squared difference
between the soft targets and the class scores of the student DNN.
Class scores are used as the soft targets instead of the class
probabilities because small values in the class scores contain
important information that may be eliminated by the softmax.
Alternatively, class probabilities after the softmax layer can be
used as soft targets if the softmax is conﬁgured to generate
softer class probabilities where the smaller values retain more
information [160]. Finally, the intermediate representations of
12Also commonly referred to as logits.
