26
Complex 
DNN B 
(teacher) 
Simple DNN 
(student) 
softmax 
softmax 
Complex 
DNN A 
(teacher) 
softmax 
scores 
class  
probabilities 
Try to match 
Fig. 45.
Knowledge distillation matches the class scores of a small DNN to
an ensemble of large DNNs.
the teacher DNN can also be incorporated as the extra hints
to train the student DNN [161].
VIII. BENCHMARKING METRICS FOR DNN EVALUATION
AND COMPARISON
As we have seen in this article, there has been a signiﬁcant
amount of research on efﬁcient processing of DNNs. We should
consider several key metrics to compare the various strengths
and weaknesses of different designs and proposed techniques.
These metrics should cover important attributes such as accu-
racy/robustness, power/energy consumption, throughput/latency
and cost. Reporting all these metrics is important in order
to provide a complete picture of the trade-offs made by a
proposed design or technique. We have prepared a website to
collect these metrics from various publications [162].
In terms of accuracy and robustness, it is important that the
accuracy be reported on widely-accepted datasets as discussed
in Section IV. The difﬁculty of the dataset and/or task should
be considered when measuring the accuracy. For instance, the
MNIST dataset for digit recognition is signiﬁcantly easier than
the ImageNet dataset. As a result, a DNN that performs well
on MNIST may not necessarily perform well on ImageNet.
Thus it is important that the same dataset and task is used when
comparing the accuracy of different DNN models; currently
ImageNet is preferred since it presents a challenge for DNNs,
as opposed to MNIST, which can also be addressed with simple
non-DNN techniques. To demonstrate primarily hardware
innovations, it would be desirable to report results for widely-
used DNN models (e.g., AlexNet, GoogLeNet) whose accuracy
and robustness have been well studied and tested.
Energy and power are important when processing DNNs at
the edge in embedded devices with limited battery capacity
(e.g., smart phones, smart sensors, UAVs, and wearables), or in
the cloud in data centers with stringent power ceilings due to
cooling costs, respectively. Edge processing is preferred over
the cloud for certain applications due to latency, privacy or
communication bandwidth limitations. When evaluating the
power and energy consumption, it is important to account
for all aspects of the system including the chip and external
memory accesses.
High throughput is necessary to deliver real-time perfor-
mance for interactive applications such as navigation and
robotics. For data analytics, high throughput means that more
data can be analyzed in a given amount of time. As the amount
of visual data is growing exponentially, high-throughput big
data analytics becomes important, particularly if an action needs
to be taken based on the analysis (e.g., security or terrorist
prevention; medical diagnosis).
Low latency is necessary for real-time interactive applications.
Latency measures the time between when the pixel arrives
to a system and when the result is generated. Latency is
measured in terms of seconds, while throughput is measured
in operations/second. Often high throughput is obtained by
batching multiple images/frames together for processing; this
results in multiple frame latency (e.g., at 30 frames per second,
a batch of 100 frames results in a 3 second delay). This delay
is not acceptable for real-time applications, such as high-speed
navigation where it would reduce the time available for course
correction. Thus achieving low latency and high throughput
simultaneously can be a challenge.
Hardware cost is in large part dictated by the amount of
on-chip storage and the number of cores. Typical embedded
processors have limited on-chip storage on the order of a few
hundred kilobytes. Since there is a trade-off between the amount
of on-chip memory and the external memory bandwidth, both
metrics should be reported. Similarly, there is a correlation
between the number of cores and the throughput. In addition,
while many cores can be built on a chip, the number of cores
that can actually be used at a given time should be reported. It is
often unrealistic to assume peak utilization and performance due
to limitations of mapping and memory bandwidth. Accordingly,
the power and throughput should be reported for running actual
DNNs as opposed to only reporting theoretical limits.
A. Metrics for DNN Models
To evaluate the properties of a given DNN model, we should
consider the following metrics:
• The accuracy of the model in terms of the top-5 error
on datasets such as ImageNet. Also, the type of data
augmentation used (e.g., multiple crops, ensemble models)
should be reported.
• The network architecture of the model should be reported,
including number of layers, ﬁlter sizes, number of ﬁlters
and number of channels.
• The number of weights impact the storage requirement of
the model and should be reported. If possible, the number
of non-zero weights should be reported since this reﬂects
the theoretical minimum storage requirements.
• The number of MACs that needs to be performed should
be reported as it is somewhat indicative of the number
of operations and potential throughput of the given DNN.
If possible, the number of non-zero MACs should also
be reported since this reﬂects the theoretical minimum
compute requirements.
Table IV shows how these metrics are reported for various
well known DNNs. The accuracy is reported for the case where
only a single crop for a single model is used for classiﬁcation,
such that the number of weights and MACs in the table are
