Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
1
Introduction
As machine learning (ML) models become integral in high-stakes domains like healthcare and finance,
the interpretability of these models is crucial for ML practitioners and domain experts (e.g., doctors and
policymakers).
Understanding model behavior is essential to identify errors and biases and gauge the
reliability of model predictions, especially in complex models (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Several post
hoc explanation methods have been proposed such as perturbation-based methods (e.g., LIME (Ribeiro
et al., 2016b), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017)) and gradient-based methods (e.g., Gradient times Input
(Simonyan et al., 2014), SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017), Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017),
GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)).
Prior research has investigated various aspects of explanation methods. For example, metrics have been
developed to assess the faithfulness of explanations to the model’s behavior, such as comparing them to a
model’s ground truth feature importances or using the "Remove and Retrain" (ROAR) approach (Liu et al.,
2021; Hooker et al., 2018). However, challenges arise due to the unavailability of ground truth in real-world
applications and the impracticality of retraining models in certain settings (Zhou et al., 2021). Studies have
shown that popular explanation methods can produce inconsistent or misleading explanations, leading to
risks like deploying biased models or making erroneous clinical decisions (Aivodji et al., 2019; Slack et al.,
2020).
However, while prior research has studied explanation methods, the (dis)agreement among different methods
has not been extensively investigated. Practitioners often use multiple methods, but these can yield conflicting
explanations. Therefore, resolving these disagreements is crucial to avoid reliance on misleading explanations
with potentially severe consequences (Slack et al., 2020). Yet, there is a lack of research on the extent to
which explanations disagree and how practitioners resolve these disagreements.
In this work, we formalize and investigate the disagreement problem in explainable ML, a novel area of research
that examines conflicts among post hoc explanation methods. We present the following key contributions:
1. We conduct semi-structured interviews with 25 data scientists, gaining insights on the nature and
frequency of explanation disagreements in their workflows. This input helps us define what constitutes
an explanation disagreement in practical scenarios. 1.
2. Building on these insights, we formalize the concept of explanation disagreement and create a new
evaluation framework to quantitatively assess disagreements between pairs of explanations for the
same model prediction.
3. We apply this framework in an extensive empirical analysis, measuring disagreement levels across four
real-world datasets, three data modalities, six advanced explanation methods, and various predictive
models, including logistic regression, tree-based models, and various neural networks.
4. Finally, we conduct an online user study with another set of 25 data scientists. We present them
with pairs of conflicting explanations, assessing which they would rely on and their rationale. We
also gather insights on their strategies for resolving such disagreements in their daily work.
Our findings reveal that explanation disagreements are common and problematic: 84% of interviewees
reported encountering explanation disagreements in practice. Our empirical analysis confirms widespread
discrepancies across different methods and data modalities (tabular, text, and image). Moreover, 86% of
our online user study participants admitted to using ad hoc heuristics or being uncertain about resolving
explanation disagreements. This highlights the need for better evaluation metrics and enhanced practitioner
understanding of the underlying principles of explanation methods.
2
Related Work
Our work is grounded in the extensive literature on explainable ML, which we discuss in this section.
1All the user interviews and studies in this work were approved by our institution’s IRB.
2
