Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
correlation and pairwise correlation agreement metrics in Figure 15 for 4 datasets: COMPAS (7 features),
German Credit (20 features), Forest Cover (45 features) and Gas Concentration (128 features) between the 6
explanation methods for neural networks models. We did not observe a drastic change in the disagreement
between explanations when the features in the tabular data increased from 7 to 128; however, we did notice
a substantially lower rank correlation between LIME and KernelSHAP with other methods for the Gas
Concentration dataset which has the largest number of features among the 4 datasets.
E
Omitted Details from Section 5
E.1
Screenshots of UI
In Figures 16 and 17, we present screenshots of the UI that participants are presented with before beginning
the study. The purpose of this introduction page is to familiarize the participants with the COMPAS
prediction setting, the six explainability methods we use, and the explainability plots we show in each of the
prompts.
Figure 16: This is a screenshot of the first half of the introductory page, describing our COMPAS risk
score prediction setting and briefly summarizing the six explainability algorithms used (with links to their
corresponding papers for the interested participant).
E.2
Prompts Used
In this section, we share the 15 prompts that we showed users. Each prompt highlights a pair of different
explainability algorithms on a COMPAS data point. For each pair, we chose the data point from the entire
COMPAS set that maximized the rank correlation between the explanations.
E.3
User Study Questions
In each of the five prompts, we asked participants the following questions, which we refer to as Set 1. Questions
3-4 were only shown if the user selected Mostly agree, Mostly disagree, or Completely disagree to Question (1).
1. To what extent do you think the two explanations shown above agree or disagree with each other?
(choice between Completely agree, Mostly agree, Mostly disagree, Completely disagree)
2. Please explain why you chose the above answer.
3. Since you believe that the above explanations disagree (to some extent), which explanation would
you rely on? (choice between Algorithm 1 explanation, Algorithm 2 explanation, It depends)
28
