Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Figure 17: This is a screenshot of the second half of the introductory page, describing the concrete task and
an explanation of what is shown in the explainability plots.
4. Please explain why you chose the above answer.
After answering all five prompts, the user was then asked the following set of questions, which we refer to as
Set 2. Questions 4-9 were only shown if the user selected Yes to Question 3.
1. (Optional) What is your name?
2. What is your occupation? (eg: PhD student, software engineer, etc.)
3. Have you used explainability methods in your work before? (Yes/No)
4. What do you use explainability methods for?
5. Which data modalities do you run explainability algorithms on in your day to day workflow? (eg:
tabular data, images, language, audio, etc.)
6. Which explainability methods do you use in your day to day workflow? (eg: LIME, KernelSHAP,
SmoothGrad, etc.)
7. Which methods do you prefer, and why?
8. Do you observe disagreements between explanations output by state of the art methods in your day
to day workflow?
9. How do you resolve such disagreements in your day to day workflow?
E.4
Further analysis of overall agreement levels
In this section, we present further plots analyzing responses to questions (1) in Set 1. As shown in Figure
19a, only 32% of responses were Mostly Agree/Completely Agree and 68% were Mostly Disagree/Completely
Disagree, indicating that participants experienced the disagreement problem. We also grouped the responses
by prompt, shown in Figure 19b, highlighting that different pairs of algorithms can have different levels
of disagreement. We removed prompts with less than 4 total responses. We see that there are varying
levels of disagreements among prompts. For example, all participants who were shown the Gradient vs.
SmoothGrad prompt believed they agreed to some extent, while all participants who were shown the Gradient
vs. Integrated Gradients prompt believed they disagreed to some extent.
29
