Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
point generated using two different explanation methods (e.g., LIME and KernelSHAP in Figure 5). The
explanations (and data points) within these prompts were selected to ensure high disagreement between them
as per the metrics discussed in prior sections. We displayed the full set of k “ 7 COMPAS features, showing
the feature importance of each feature. The red and blue bars indicate that the feature contributes negatively
and positively, respectively, to the model prediction. Participants were first asked the question “To what
extent do you think the two explanations shown above agree or disagree with each other?” and given four
choices: completely agree, mostly agree, mostly disagree, and completely disagree. If the participants indicated
any level of disagreement (i.e., any of the latter 3 choices), we then asked them “Since you believe that the
above explanations disagree (to some extent), which explanation would you rely on?” and presented them
with three choices: the two explanation methods shown and “it depends”. Then, they were asked to explain
their response. Participants were allowed to take as much time as they needed.
Figure 5: The user interface for a prompt. The user is shown two explanations for a COMPAS data point,
showing the feature importance value of each of the 7 features. Red and blue indicate negative and positive
feature values, respectively. See the text for more details.
5.2
Results and Insights
We now discuss the results and findings from our user study.
5.2.1
Do practitioners observe disagreements?
We aggregated the responses to the first question in each prompt, “To what extent do you think the explanations
shown above agree or disagree with each other?”. Overall, 4%, 28%, 50%, and 18% of responses indicate
completely agree, mostly agree, mostly disagree, and completely disagree, respectively, highlighting that there
is significant disagreement among our prompts. See Appendix E.4 for more details.
5.2.2
Are certain explanations favored over others?
Next, since different explanation methods have different levels of popularity, we analyze if certain methods
are chosen more often in disagreements. Figure 6a shows the distribution of how participants resolved
disagreements for each prompt (dropping prompts with 4 or fewer responses). We first emphasize that there
is high variability in how participants chose to resolve disagreements, showing a lack of consensus for the
12
