Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
on our work has attempted to understand the sources of these disagreements. For example, (Han et al.,
2022) extended our work to demonstrate that state-of-the-art explanation methods all perform local linear
approximations of underlying models but do so in different ways (e.g., using different loss functions and
over different local neighborhoods). This can be a source of disagreement between the explanation methods.
Furthermore, our results raise the question of how to resolve explanation disagreements when they occur.
While this remains an active area of research, one approach to selecting among explanation methods is to
first define the desired goal of an explanation and then choose the method that best meets this goal. For
example, follow-up work by Han et al. (2022) defines local function approximation as the desired goal of an
explanation, develops a theoretical framework to analyze how faithfully each method performs local function
approximation and advises selecting the method that performs it most faithfully over a given input space.
Given the high-stakes applications of model explanations, using a principled and systematic approach to select
among explanation methods is preferable to the ad hoc strategies currently employed by practitioners. Finally,
the extent of explanation disagreement would also depend on the specific metric being used to measure the
disagreement. For instance, while our results broadly demonstrate a moderate to high degree of disagreement
among all pairs of explanations across all data modalities, we observe that the extent of disagreement is
slightly lower when we consider variants of the proposed metrics. See Appendix D.2 for additional details.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and feedback on this paper. We also thank
Javin Pombra for assisting with preliminary results during the initial phases of this study. Lastly, we are very
grateful to Ana Lucic and Maurits J. R. Bleeker for pointing out the omission of a relevant study and helping
us improve the contextualization of this work.
References
Antonio Gulli corpus of news articles.
http://groups.di.unipi.it/~gulli/AG_corpus_of_news_
articles.html, 2005. Accessed: 2021-01-20.
Pascal Visual Object Classes 2012. http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/index.html/, 2012. Ac-
cessed: 2021-01-20.
ImageNet. https://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/index.php, 2015. Accessed: 2021-01-20.
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim. Sanity checks
for saliency maps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Chirag Agarwal, Eshika Saxena, Satyapriya Krishna, Martin Pawelczyk, Nari Johnson, Isha Puri, Marinka
Zitnik, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. OpenXAI: Towards a transparent evaluation of model explanations. 36th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks,
2022.
Sushant Agarwal, Shahin Jabbari, Chirag Agarwal, Sohini Upadhyay, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Himabindu
Lakkaraju. Towards the unification and robustness of perturbation and gradient based explanations. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Ulrich Aivodji, Hiromi Arai, Olivier Fortineau, Sébastien Gambs, Satoshi Hara, and Alain Tapp. Fairwashing:
the risk of rationalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S Jaakkola. On the robustness of interpretability methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08049, 2018.
Antonio Jesus Banegas-Luna, Carlos Martınez-Cortes, and Horacio Perez-Sanchez. Fighting the disagreement
in explainable machine learning with consensus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01288, 2023.
Gagan Bansal, Tongshuang Wu, Joyce Zhou, Raymond Fok, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Marco Tulio Ribeiro,
and Daniel Weld. Does the whole exceed its parts? the effect of ai explanations on complementary team
performance. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021.
15
