Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
B.2
Explanation Methods
For tabular data, the perturbation-based explanation methods (LIME and KernelSHAP) were applied to
explain all four models while the gradient-based explanation methods (Vanilla Gradients, Integrated Gradients,
Gradient*Input, and SmoothGRAD) were applied to explain the logistic regression and neural network models
to explain samples from the test set (1,198 samples for the COMPAS dataset and 200 samples for the German
Credit dataset). Because gradients are not computed for tree-based models, the gradient-based explanation
methods were not applied to the random forest and gradient-boosted tree models. When applying explanation
methods with a sample size hyperparameter (LIME, KernelSHAP, Integrated Gradients, SmoothGRAD), we
performed a convergence check and selected the sample size at which an increase in the number of samples
does not significantly change the explanations. Change in explanations at the current versus previous sample
size is measured by the L2 distance of feature attributions, the L2 distance of the ranks of all features, and
the six metrics. For both COMPAS and German Credit datasets, we used 2,000 samples for relevant methods
(i.e. LIME, KernelSHAP, SmoothGRAD, and Integrated Gradients).
For text data, we applied all six explanation methods on the LSTM-based classifier to explain predictions
for 7,600 samples in the test set. For LIME and KernelSHAP, we follow the convergence analysis described
above and find that attributions do not change significantly beyond 500 perturbations; hence, we use 500
perturbations for LIME and KernelSHAP. Integrated Gradients explanations were generated using 500
steps which is higher than the recommended number of steps mentioned in Sundararajan et al. (2017).
SmoothGRAD explanations were generated using 500 samples to get the most confident attribution which is
significantly higher than the recommended number of 50 samples Smilkov et al. (2017).
For image data, we applied all six explanation methods on the ResNet-18 model He et al. (2016) to explain
predictions for the PASCAL VOC 2012 test set of 1,449 samples. Integrated Gradients explanations were
generated using 400 steps, significantly higher than the recommendation of 300 Sundararajan et al. (2017), to
obtain a stable and confident attribution map. Similarly, SmoothGRAD explanations were generated using a
sample size of 200 which is also higher than the recommended sample size of 50 Smilkov et al. (2017). For
LIME and KernelSHAP, we chose 100 perturbations to train the surrogate model as we did not notice any
significant changes in attributions beyond 50 perturbations. KernelSHAP and LIME were used to compute
attributions of super-pixels annotated in PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation maps. Due to a larger feature
space in images compared to the previous tabular and text datasets, disagreement metrics based on top-k
features may not provide a clear picture. Hence, we use Rank Correlation between attribution maps generated
by a pair of explanation methods as the disagreement metric.
C
Results from Empirical Analysis of Disagreement Problem
C.1
Tabular Data: COMPAS and German Credit Datasets
The tabular datasets consist of the COMPAS and German Credit datasets. The full set of figures showing
explanation disagreement for the two datasets, over four models, measured by six metrics, displayed in two
formats (metric mean in heatmap and metric distribution in boxplot) for varying values of top-k features
can be found in the code repository accompanying this paper. Here, we elaborate on trends of explanation
disagreement at the level of metrics, models, and datasets.
At the level of metrics, explanations show stronger disagreement when measured by stricter metrics (such as
signed rank agreement) than by less strict metrics (such as feature agreement and sign agreement). Generally,
as the number of top-k features increases, metrics show stronger disagreement between explanations. The
exception is the feature agreement metric which, by definition equals one (indicating perfect agreement) when
the k is the total number of features. For both datasets, the majority of models and explanation pairs have
several points for which the rank correlation metric is near zero or even negative, indicating disagreeing, and
even opposing, explanations.
At the level of models, explanations for more complex models (such as the neural network) tend to show
similar or stronger disagreement than explanations for less complex models (such as the logistic regression
model). As discussed in the main section of the paper, as the complexity of the black box model increases,
21
