Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
A striking finding from our study is that participants characterize explanation disagreement based on factors
such as mismatch in top features, feature ordering, directions of feature contributions, and relative feature
ordering, but not on the feature importance values output by different explanation methods. 24 out of 25
participants (96%) opine that feature importance values output by different explanation methods are not
directly comparable. For example, they note that while LIME outputs coefficients of a linear model as feature
importance values, SHAP outputs Shapley values as feature attributions which sum to the probability of
the predicted class. Thus, data scientists do not try to base explanation disagreement on these numbers not
being equal or similar. One of our participants succinctly summarized practitioners’ perspectives on this
explanation disagreement problem: "The values generated by different explanation methods are different. So,
I would not characterize disagreement based on that. But, I would at least want the explanations they output
to give me consistent insights. The explanations should agree on what are the most important features, the
ordering among them, and so on for me to derive consistent insights. But, they don’t!"
3.2
Formalizing the Notion of Explanation Disagreement
Our study indicates that ML practitioners consider the following key aspects when they think about
explanation disagreement: a) the extent to which explanations differ in the top-k features, the signs of these
top-k features, and the ordering of these top-k features, and b) the extent to which explanations differ in the
relative ordering of certain features of interest. To capture these intuitions about explanation disagreement,
we propose six different metrics: feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, signed rank agreement,
rank correlation, and pairwise rank agreement. The first four metrics capture disagreement with respect to the
top-k features of the explanations and the last two metrics capture disagreement with respect to a selected
set of features that could be provided as input by an end user. For all six metrics, lower values indicate
stronger disagreement. See Section A for formal definitions.
3.2.1
Measuring Disagreement With Respect to Top-k Features
We now define four metrics, which capture specific aspects of explanation disagreement with respect to the
top-k features.2
Feature Agreement:
ML practitioners in interviews (Section 3.1) indicated that a key notion of
disagreement between a pair of explanations is that they output different top-k features. To capture this
notion, feature agreement computes the fraction of common features between the sets of top-k features of the
two explanations.
Rank Agreement:
Practitioners also indicated that if the ordering of the top-k features is different for
two explanations (even if the feature sets are the same), then they consider it to be a disagreement. To
capture this notion, rank agreement computes the fraction of features that are not only common between
the sets of top-k features of two explanations, but also have the same position in the respective rank orders.
Rank agreement is a stricter metric than feature agreement since it also considers the ordering of the top-k
features. While the practitioners we interviewed favored the aforementioned definition of the rank agreement
metric, one could also imagine a less strict variant that accounts for the differences between the ranks of the
top-k features in the two explanations. Such a weighted rank agreement metric would quantify the degree of
agreement based on how far apart the top-k features are, rather than only considering an exact match of
their ranks. This implies that even if certain features are not in the same position, their relative closeness
still contributes positively to the overall agreement score, making it a softer variant of the rank agreement
defined above. See Section D.2 for more details on weighted rank agreement and additional disagreement
metrics that we explored.
Sign Agreement:
In our study, practitioners also mentioned that they consider two explanations to
disagree if the feature attribution signs (i.e. directions of feature contribution) do not align for the top-k
features. To capture this notion, sign agreement computes the fraction of features that are not only common
2The top-k features of an explanation are typically computed only based on the magnitude of the feature importance values
and not the signs.
5
