Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
majority of prompts. However, when participants do decide to choose a method rather than abstaining, they
often choose the same method. For example, for the Vanilla Gradient vs. SmoothGrad pair (top row in
Figure 6a), participants either chose SmoothGrad over Vanilla Gradient or chose neither. We also aggregate
these choices’ overall prompts, and in Figure 6b, we plot how often each of the six explanation methods is
chosen, finding that indeed, certain methods were favored over others. While KernelSHAP was chosen 66.7%
of the time when there were disagreements, Gradient times Input was only chosen 7.0% of the time. We
include a further explanation of why participants chose each of the explanations in Appendix E.5, including
quotes from participants that supported each method.
(a) The frequency with which each of the explanations in a pair is
selected upon disagreement. The blue, gold, and grey bars show the
percentage of participants (X-axis) that picked the left, right, and
neither method when presented with the pair of methods shown
on the Y-axis.
(b) The frequency with which each of the expla-
nations was chosen when there is a disagreement.
X-axis indicates the explanation method and Y-
axis indicates the frequency.
Figure 6: Figures highlight which methods participants chose when the explanations they were shown
disagreed. In (a), we show how participants resolved each particular prompt. In (b), we show the overall
frequencies with which an explanation method was selected.
5.2.3
How do practitioners resolve disagreements?
Across all six explanation methods, we find three unifying themes that dictated why participants chose one
explanation over the other. We give a high-level description of these themes below, highlighting direct quotes
from participants in Table 1.
1. One method is inherently better than the other because of its associated theory or publication time (33%):
Participants often indicated preference towards a particular method without referencing the shown explanation
citing features such as the paper’s publication time (more recent is better), the theory behind the method,
and the method’s stability.
2. One of the generated explanations matches intuition better (32%):
Participants frequently said that one
method’s explanation aligned with their intuition better, citing the absolute and relative values of specific
features as evidence.
3. LIME and SHAP are better because the COMPAS dataset comprises tabular data (23%):
Participants
said that they mainly used LIME and SHAP for tabular data and commonly cited this as their sole reason.
5.2.4
Experiencing and resolving disagreements in day-to-day workflow
After answering all 5 prompts, participants were asked a set of questions on their experience with the
disagreement problem in their day-to-day work. First, to filter out participants who didn’t use explanation
methods, we asked: “Have you used explanation methods in your work before?”. Of the 25 participants, 5 of
them indicated that they had not. We asked the other 20 participants further questions to better understand
their experience with the disagreement problem. The full set of questions can also be found in Appendix
E.3. Having understood what participants look for to determine disagreement in Section 3.1, we next sought
to better understand two crucial questions related to the disagreement problem: (Q1): Do you observe
13
