Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
A.2
Measuring Disagreement With Respect to Features of Interest
Practitioners also indicated that they consider two explanations to be different if the relative ordering of features of
interest (e.g., salary and credit score discussed in Section 3.1) differ between the two explanations. To formalize this
notion, we introduce the two metrics below.
Rank Correlation:
We adopt a standard rank correlation metric (i.e., Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient)
to measure the agreement between feature rankings provided by two explanations for a selected set of features. In
practice, this selected set of features corresponds to features that are of interest to end users and can be provided as
input by end users. Given two explanations Ea and Eb, rank correlation is formulated as:
RankCorrelationpEa, Eb, Fq “ rspRpEa, Fq, RpEb, Fqq
where F “ tf1, f2 ¨ ¨ ¨ u is a set of features selected by an end user, rs computes Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient, and RpE, Fq assigns ranks to features in F based on explanation E.
Pairwise Rank Agreement:
The pairwise rank agreement takes as input a set of features that are of
interest to the user and captures if the relative ordering of every pair of features in that set is the same for
both explanations, i.e., if feature A is more important than B according to one explanation, then the same
should be true for the other explanation. This metric computes the fraction of feature pairs for which the
relative ordering is the same between two explanations. Given two explanations Ea and Eb, pairwise rank
agreement is formulated as:
PairwiseRankAgreementpEa, Eb, Fq “
ř
i,j for iăj
1rROpEa, fi, fjq “ ROpEb, fi, fjqs
`|F |
2
˘
where F “ tf1, f2 ¨ ¨ ¨ u is a set of features selected by an end user, the relative ordering function ROpE, fi, fjq
is an indicator function that returns 1 if feature fi is more important than feature fj according to explanation
E and returns 0 otherwise.
B
Experimental Setup
B.1
Black Box Models: Training and Performance
For tabular data, we train four models: a logistic regression model, a gradient-boosted tree model (50
estimators), a random forest model (50 estimators), and a densely-connected feed-forward neural network
(with 3 hidden layers with relu activation consisting of 50, 100, and 50 neurons, respectively). For the
COMPAS dataset, we train the four models based on an 80%-20% train-test split of the dataset, using
features to predict the COMPAS risk score group. The test accuracies of the four models are 0.75, 0.79, 0.79,
and 0.73, respectively. For the German credit dataset, we train the same four models based on an 80%-20%
train-test split of the dataset, using features to predict the credit risk group. The test accuracies of the four
models are 0.65, 0.70, 0.73, and 0.64, respectively.
For text data, we trained a widely-used LSTM-based text classifier, based on 120,000 training samples and
7,600 test samples, to predict the news category of the article from which a sentence was obtained. The
model performs with 90.67% accuracy. The architecture comprises an embedding layer of dimension 300,
followed by an LSTM layer of hidden size 256 connected to a four-dimensional output layer.
For image data, we use the pre-trained ResNet-18 model He et al. (2016) and analyze explanations generated
for predictions made to classify images to one of the 1000 classes. This model performs 69.758 % and 89.078
% on Accuracy@1 and Accuracy@5 metrics6, respectively.
6https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.html
20
