Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
E.6
Analysis of reasons participants chose neither algorithm
In this section, we analyze the responses to Set 1, Question (4) in Section E.3, focusing on when participants
selected “It depends” in Question (3), which was chosen in 38% of cases. Again, we present an overarching
summary of the reasons participants made this decision in Table 4.
Rationale
Representative Quote
1. Need more informa-
tion
• "need to see the final prediction of the model and the feature values"
2. Pick neither explana-
tion
• "No compelling reason to choose one over the other. Both don’t align
with intuition."
3. Unsure/Don’t know
• "I’m not sure which of the two methods is more trustworthy"
4. Would consult an ex-
pert
• "I would ask a domain expert for his/her opinion"
5.
Combine explana-
tions
• "I would combine both – note that age might be doing weird things, but
that length of stay and race both contribute to a negative prediction"
6. Depends on use case
• "The two methods have different interpretations - it depends on if I’m
more interested in comparing my explanation to some baseline individual
state versus just interested in understanding the immediate local behavior"
Table 4: Reasons people answered "It depends" after being asked to choose between disagreements
E.7
Further analysis of concluding questionnaire
In this section, we extend the analysis presented in 5.2.3, analyzing the responses to questions in Set 2 of
Section E.3. As stated in 5.2.3, we received a total of 20 positive responses to Question (3), but one declined
to answer Questions (4) through (9). Therefore, we analyze the remaining 19 responses.
In Question (4), we found that study participants use explainability methods for a variety of reasons such
as understanding models, debugging models, help explain models to clients, research. In Question (5), we
found that 16 of 19 participants employed explanations for tabular data, 6 of 19 participants for text and
language data, 11 of 19 participants for image data, and 1 of 19 for audio data. In Question (6), we found
that 14 of 19 participants used LIME, 14 of 19 participants used SHAP, and 13 of 19 participants used some
sort of gradient-based methods. Participants also indicated using methods like GradCAM, dimensionality
reduction, MAPLE, and rule-based methods. In Question (7), 9 of 19 participants stated that they preferred
both LIME and SHAP, with another 3 of 19 participants stating LIME only. We showcase some intriguing
answers from Question (7) below:
• “LIME and SHAP seem to be the most universally applicable and I can understand.”
• “Methods with underlying theoretical justifications such as KernelSHAP and Integrated Gradients”
• “LIME and SHAP ... [easy to implement] and can work with black box”
• “SHAP and LIME because ... [they are] easy to understand and have standard implementations”
• “LIME, because everything else isn’t necessarily capturing what I actually want to know about the
local behavior”
Finally, we provide additional quotes highlighting the responses to Questions (8) and (9), which were briefly
analyzed in Section 5.2.3. These are shown in Table 5.
E.8
Breakdown of the Results
The main themes for both academic and industry participants revolve around trusting methods based on
their theoretical foundations, intuitive explanations, and suitability for the data type (tabular).
32
