Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Next, we apply six state-of-the-art post hoc explanation methods to explain the black box models’ predictions
for a set of test data points.3 We apply two perturbation-based explanation methods (LIME Ribeiro et al.
(2016b) and KernelShap Lundberg & Lee (2017)), and four gradient-based explanation methods (Vanilla
Gradient Simonyan et al. (2014), Gradient times Input Shrikumar et al. (2017), Integrated Gradients Sun-
dararajan et al. (2017), and SmoothGrad Smilkov et al. (2017)). For explanation methods with a sample size
hyper-parameter, we either run the explanation method to convergence (i.e., select a sample size such that an
increase in the number of samples does not significantly change the explanations) or use a sample size that is
much higher than the sample size recommended by previous work.
We then evaluate the (dis)agreement between the explanation methods using the metrics described in
Section 3.2. For tabular and text data, we apply rank correlation and pairwise rank agreement across
all features; and feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, and signed rank agreement across
top-k features for varying values of k. For image data, metrics that operate on the top-k features are more
applicable to super-pixels. Thus, we apply the six disagreement metrics on explanations output by LIME
and KernelSHAP (which leverage superpixels), and calculate rank correlation (across all pixels as features)
between the explanations output by gradient-based methods. Additional details are described in Appendix B.
4.3
Results and Insights
We discuss the results of our empirical analysis for each of the three data modalities.
4.3.1
Tabular Data
Figure 1 shows the disagreement between various pairs of explanation methods for the neural network model
trained on the COMPAS dataset. We computed the six metrics outlined in Section 3.2 using k “ 5 (out
of 7 features) for metrics that focus on top-k features. Each cell in the heatmap shows the metric value
averaged over the test data points for each pair of explanation methods with lighter colors indicating stronger
disagreement. We see that explanation methods tend to exhibit slightly higher values on pairwise rank
agreement and feature agreement metrics, and relatively lower values on other metrics (indicating stronger
disagreement).
We next study the effect of the number of top features on the degree of disagreement. Figure 2 shows the
disagreement of explanation methods for the neural network model trained on the COMPAS dataset. We
computed the rank agreement (top row) and signed rank agreement (bottom row) at top-k features for
increasing values of k. We see that as the number of top-k features increases, rank agreement and signed rank
agreement decrease. This indicates that, as k increases, top-k features of a pair of explanation methods are
less likely to contain shared features with the same rank (as measured by rank agreement) or shared features
with the same rank and sign (as measured by signed rank agreement). These patterns are consistent across
other models trained on the COMPAS dataset. See Appendix C.1.
In addition, across metrics, values of k, and models, the specific explanation method pairs of Vanilla Gradient-
SmoothGrad and Gradient times Input-Integrated Gradients exhibit strong agreement while the pairs of
Vanilla Gradient-Integrated Gradients, Vanilla Gradient-Gradient times Input, SmoothGrad-Gradient times
Input and SmoothGrad-Integrated Gradients consistently exhibit stronger disagreement. These results
are consistent with the theoretical findings indicating that certain pairs of explanation methods are more
consistent with one another than other pairs Han et al. (2022).
Furthermore, there are varying degrees of disagreement among pairs of explanation methods. For example,
for the neural network model trained on the COMPAS dataset, rank correlation displays a wide range of
values across explanation method pairs, with 14 out of 15 explanation method pairs even exhibiting negative
rank correlation when explaining multiple data points. This is shown in the left panel of Figure 3, which
displays the rank correlation over all the features among all pairs of explanation methods for the neural
network model trained on the COMPAS dataset.
3We also studied another explanation method called L2X Chen et al. (2018). See Section D.1 for more details.
7
