Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
between the sets of top-k features of two explanations, but also share the same sign in both explanations.
Sign agreement is a stricter metric than feature agreement since it also considers signs of the top-k features.
Signed Rank Agreement:
This metric fuses the above three notions of explanation disagreement
and computes the fraction of features that are not only common between the sets of top-k features of two
explanations but also share the same feature attribution sign and rank in both explanations. The signed rank
agreement is the strictest compared to all the aforementioned metrics since it considers both the ordering
and the signs of the top-k features.
3.2.2
Measuring Disagreement With Respect to Features of Interest
Practitioners also indicated that they consider two explanations to be different if the relative ordering of
features of interest (e.g., salary and credit score discussed in Section 3.1) differ between the explanations.
These features could be provided as input by an end user (such as a data scientist). To formalize this notion,
we introduce the two metrics below.
Rank Correlation:
In practice, this selected set of features corresponds to features that are of interest to
end users and can be provided as input by end users. Rank correlation computes Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient between feature rankings provided by two explanations for these selected sets of features.
Pairwise Rank Agreement:
The pairwise rank agreement takes as input a set of features that are of
interest to the user and computes the fraction of feature pairs for which the relative ordering is the same
between two explanations.
4
Empirical Analysis of Explanation Disagreement
We leverage the metrics outlined in Section 3 and carry out a comprehensive empirical analysis with six
state-of-the-art explanation methods and four real-world datasets spanning three data modalities to study
the explanation disagreement problem. In this section, we describe the datasets, experimental setup, and key
findings.
4.1
Datasets
To carry out our empirical analysis, we use four datasets spanning three data modalities (tabular, text,
and image). For tabular data, we use the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative
Sanctions (COMPAS) ProPublica and German Credit datasets Repository. The COMPAS dataset comprises
seven features on the demographics, criminal history, and prison time of 4,937 defendants. Each defendant
is classified as either low or high risk for recidivism based on the COMPAS algorithm’s risk score. The
German Credit dataset contains twenty features on the demographics, credit history, bank account balance,
loan information, and employment information of 1,000 loan applicants. Each applicant is classified as
either low or high risk for defaulting on a loan. For text data, we use Antonio Gulli (AG)’s corpus of news
articles (AG_News) ag (2005). It contains 127,600 sentences (collected from 1,000,000+ articles from 2,000+
sources with a vocabulary size of 95,000+ words). The class label is the topic of the article from which
a sentence was obtained (World, Sports, Business, or Science/Technology). For image data, we use the
ImageNet´1k Russakovsky et al. (2015); ima (2015) object recognition dataset. It contains 1,381,167 images
belonging to 1000 categories. We obtain segmentation maps from PASCAL VOC 2012 voc (2012) that are
directly used as super-pixels for the explanation methods.
4.2
Experimental Setup
We train a variety of black box models. For tabular data, we train four models: logistic regression, densely
connected feed-forward neural network, random forest, and gradient-boosted tree. For text data, we train a
widely-used vanilla LSTM-based text classifier on AG_News Zhang et al. (2015) corpus. For image data, we
use the pre-trained ResNet-18 He et al. (2016) for ImageNet.
6
