Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Theme Highlighted
Sample Quotes
1. One method’s
paper/theory suggests
that it’s inherently
better (33%).
• “I have no reason to believe the gradient holds anywhere other than
very locally.”
• “[Integrated Gradients is] more rigorous [than SmoothGrad] based on
the paper and axioms”
• “gradient explanations are more unstable”
2. One explanation
matches intuition
better (32%).
• “seems unlikely that all features contributed to a positive classification”
• “features such as priors_count and length of stay [are] important for
determining”
• “Gradient*Input only consider[s] sensitive features (age, race) as im-
pactful which could be a sign of a biased underlying data distribution”
3. LIME/SHAP are
better for tabular data
(23%).
• “I use LIME for structured data”
• “SHAP is more commonly used [than Vanilla Gradient] for tabular
data”
Table 1: Themes summarizing how participants decided between explanations when faced with disagreement
along with quotes.
disagreements between explanations output by state-of-the-art methods in your day-to-day workflow? and
(Q2): How do you resolve such disagreements in your day to day workflow?.
One of the 20 participants declined to respond to (Q1) and (Q2) because they were not a practitioner. Out
of the other 19, 14 participants (74%) responded “yes” to (Q1), indicating that they did in fact encounter
explanation disagreement in practice. Of the remaining 5 who said they did not, 3 said they had not really
paid attention to the issue. We also aimed to uncover how participants dealt with the disagreement problem
when it arose in practice (Q2). 14 participants responded affirmatively to (Q1), and their responses to (Q2)
can be grouped into 3 categories. 50% favored using ad-hoc heuristics based on personal preferences for
choosing which methods to use (“picking their favorite method”, “rules of thumb based on results in papers”).
These heuristics varied among participants and included ease of implementation, accompanying theoretical
results, recency of publication, ease of understanding, and documentation of packages. 36% did not indicate
any explicit way for resolving these disagreements but instead demonstrated confusion and uncertainty (“no
clear answer to me”). Several of these responses also indicated the desire for the research community to make
progress and help (“I hope research community can provide some guidance”). The remaining 14% proposed
to use other metrics such as fidelity (“try and use some metric to measure fidelity”). See Appendix E.7 for
more details including the breakdown of our results for participants in academia and industry.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
The main takeaway from our work is the observation that state-of-the-art explanation methods consistently
disagree with each other across various datasets and data modalities, as quantified by the metrics we outlined.
Our empirical estimates of explanation disagreement closely align with human assessments of disagreements
among leading explainable AI methods. Our focus was on highlighting the prevalence of disagreement within
the literature on explainable AI and examining how practitioners address these disagreements. To this end,
we also conducted extensive user studies (semi-structured interviews and an online user study) and empirical
analyses. Our semi-structured interviews with machine learning practitioners highlighted that 84% of them
regularly face explanation disagreements. While there exist metrics and frameworks to both evaluate and
compare explanations output by state-of-the-art methods (Agarwal et al., 2021; 2022; Han et al., 2022),
several practitioners (86% of respondents in our online user study) admitted to using ad hoc heuristics or
being uncertain about resolving explanation disagreements in practice. This highlights a critical gap between
research and practice in explainable machine learning.
In this work, we prioritized examining the prevalence of explanation disagreement rather than exploring
its underlying causes, given the complexity of this analysis. Nonetheless, subsequent research building
14
