Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
4.3.2
Text Data
Figure 4: Disagreement between explanation methods for LSTM trained on the AG_News dataset using
k “ 11 features for metrics operating on top-k features, and all features for other metrics. Each heatmap
shows the metric value averaged over test data for each pair of explanation methods. Lighter colors indicate
more disagreement. Standard error ranges from 0.0 to 0.0025 for all six metrics.
In the case of text data, we deal with a high-dimensional feature space where words are features. We plot
the six metrics for k “ 11 which is around 25% of the average text length of a sentence (data point) in the
dataset (Figure 4). As seen in the figure, we observe severe disagreements across all the six disagreement
metrics. Rank agreement and signed rank agreement are the lowest between explanations with values under
0.1 for most cases indicating disagreement in over 90% of the top-k features. Trends are quite similar for
rank correlation and feature agreement with better agreement between gradient-based explanation methods,
such as a feature agreement of 0.61 for the Gradient times Input and Vanilla Gradient method pair.
In addition to the broader disagreements between various explanation methods, we notice specific patterns
of agreement between certain explanation methods. Based on the middle and right panels of Figure 3, we
observe a higher rank correlation between different pairs of gradient-based explanations. We also observe from
Figure 4 that LIME exhibits higher agreement with other explanation methods compared to KernelSHAP
(e.g., Figure 4 shows that the average rank correlation between LIME and all other explanation methods is
0.273, as opposed to 0.113 in case of KernelSHAP). This finding is consistent with the insights we observed
in the case of the COMPAS dataset (Figure 1, top left panel). Lastly, we notice a higher disagreement among
explanation methods for text data than for tabular data.
4.3.3
Image Data
While LIME and KernelSHAP consider superpixels of images as features, gradient-based methods consider
pixels as features. In addition, the notion of top-k features and the metrics we define on top-k features are
not semantically meaningful when we consider pixels as features. We compute all six metrics to capture
disagreement between explanations output by LIME and KernelSHAP with superpixels as features. We also
10
