Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
compute rank correlation on all the pixels (features) to capture disagreement between explanations output by
gradient-based methods.
Unlike earlier trends with tabular and text data, we see higher agreement between KernelSHAP and LIME
on all six metrics: rank correlation of 0.8977, pairwise rank agreement of 0.9302, feature agreement of 0.9535,
rank agreement of 0.8478, sign agreement of 0.9218 and signed rank agreement of 0.8193.
However, the trends are quite the opposite when we compute rank correlation at pixel-level for gradient-based
methods (See Appendix C). For instance, the rank correlation between Integrated Gradients and SmoothGrad
is 0.001, indicating strong disagreement. The disagreement is similarly quite strong in the case of other pairs
of gradient-based methods. This suggests that disagreement could potentially vary significantly based on the
granularity of image representation.
Remark 1. Throughout this section, we carried out a comprehensive empirical analysis with six explanation
methods and four real-world datasets spanning three data modalities to study the disagreement problem. While
our results generally show a moderate to high degree of disagreement among all pairs of explanations across
all data modalities, we observe that the extent of disagreement is slightly lower when we consider variants of
the proposed metrics. For example, we explored additional metrics such as weighted rank agreement, top-k
pairwise rank agreement, and top-k rank correlation and we discuss these metrics and corresponding results
in Appendix D.2.
5
Resolving the Disagreement Problem in Practice: A Qualitative Study
After establishing the fact that the majority of practitioners observe disagreement between explanations
using both qualitative analysis (Section 3) as well as quantitative analysis (Section 4), we try to understand
the different ways practitioners tackle this disagreement. To this end, we conduct a qualitative user study
targeted towards explainability practitioners. We next describe our user study design and discuss our findings.
5.1
User Study Design
In total, 25 participants participated in our study, 13 from academia and 12 from industry. Participants from
academia were graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. In contrast, participants from industry were
data scientists and ML engineers from three different for-profit companies in the technology and financial
services sectors across the United States. We recruited these participants by emailing the explainable ML
groups (and relevant mailing lists) within these organizations. 12 participants in this study (48%) also
participated in the interviews in Section 3.1.4 We conducted basic checks (e.g., pre-screening interviews and
profile checks) to ensure that each recruited participant has at least one year of experience as a data scientist,
and has working knowledge of data science and ML. 20 of these participants indicated that they had used
explanation methods in their work in various ways, including doing research, helping clients explain their
models, and debugging their own models. Following the setup in Section 4, we asked participants to compare
the output of five pairs of explanation methods on the predictions made by the neural network we trained on
the COMPAS dataset. We chose the COMPAS dataset because it only has 7 features, making it easy for
participants to understand the explanations.
First, the participants are shown an information page explaining the COMPAS risk score binary prediction
setting and various explanation methods. We indicate that we trained a neural network to predict the
COMPAS risk score (low or high) from the seven COMPAS features. We also give a brief description of each
of these seven features to participants and tell them to assume that the criminal defendant’s risk of recidivism
is correctly predicted to be high risk. In this information page, we also briefly introduce and summarize the
six explanation methods we use in the study (LIME, KernelSHAP, Vanilla Gradient, Gradient times Input,
SmoothGrad, and Integrated Gradients). Finally, we provide links to the papers describing each method. We
include a screenshot of this information page in Appendix E.1.
Next, participants were shown a series of 5 prompts, a sample of which is shown in Figure 5. Each prompt
presented two explanations of the neural network model’s prediction corresponding to a particular data
4The remaining 13 participants from the interviews were unavailable during the time of the second study.
11
