Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Figure 1: Disagreement between explanation methods for neural network model trained on COMPAS dataset
measured by six metrics: rank correlation and pairwise rank agreement across all features, and feature, rank,
sign, and signed rank agreement across top k “ 5 features. Heatmaps show the average metric value over
the test set data points for each pair of explanation methods, with lower values (lighter colors) indicating
stronger disagreement. The disagreement between a pair of explanations is considered non-trivial if less than
75% of the features agree (i.e., if feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, signed rank agreement,
or pairwise rank agreement is less than 0.75), or if the correlation among features is only moderately positive,
nonexistent, or negative (i.e. if the rank correlation is less than 0.50). Across all six heatmaps, the standard
error ranges between 0 and 0.01.
All the patterns discussed above are also generally reflected in the German Credit dataset (Appendix C.1).
However, explanation methods sometimes display stronger disagreement for the German Credit dataset than
for the COMPAS dataset. For example, rank agreement and signed rank agreement are lower for the German
Credit dataset than for the COMPAS dataset at the top 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of features for both
logistic regression and neural network models. One possible reason is that the German Credit dataset has a
larger set of features than the COMPAS dataset, resulting in a larger number of possible ranking and sign
combinations assigned by a given explanation method and making it less likely for two explanation methods
to produce consistent explanations.
Morever, explanation methods display trends associated with model complexity. For example, the disagreement
between explanation methods is similar or stronger for the neural network model than for the logistic regression
model across metrics and values of k, for both COMPAS and German Credit datasets (Appendix C.1). In
addition, explanation methods show similar levels of disagreement for the random forest and gradient-boosted
tree models. These trends suggest that disagreement among explanation methods may increase with model
complexity. As the complexity of the black box model increases, it may be more difficult to accurately
approximate the black box model with a simpler model (LIME’s strategy, for example) and more difficult to
disentangle the contribution of each feature to the model’s prediction. Thus, the higher the model complexity,
the more difficult it may be for different explanation methods to generate the true explanation and the
8
