Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
3.1.1
Interviews with Data Scientists
We conducted 30-minute semi-structured interviews with 25 data scientists who employ explainability
techniques to understand model behavior and explain it to their customers and managers. We recruited these
participants by emailing the explainable machine learning groups (and relevant mailing lists) in three different
for-profit companies in the technology and financial services sectors across the United States. We conducted
basic checks (e.g., pre-screening interviews and profile checks) to ensure that each recruited participant has
at least one year of experience as a data scientist, and has working knowledge of data science and machine
learning.
Furthermore, all of these data scientists used state-of-the-art local post hoc explanation methods (e.g., LIME,
SHAP, and gradient-based methods) in their day-to-day workflow. 19 participants (76%) were male, and 6
(24%) were female. 16 participants (64%) had more than 2 years of experience working with explainability
techniques, and the remaining 9 (36%) had about 8 to 12 months of experience. Our interviews included,
but were not limited to the following questions: Q1) How often do you use multiple explanation methods to
understand the same model prediction? Q2) What constitutes disagreement between two explanations that
explain the same model prediction? Q3) How often do you encounter disagreements between explanations
output by different methods for the same model prediction?
3.1.2
Findings and Insights
The interviews revealed how data scientists use explanation methods and their perspectives on what constitutes
disagreement among explanations. 22 out of the 25 participants (88%) said that they almost always use
multiple explanation methods to understand the same model prediction. Furthermore, 21 out of the 25
participants (84%) mentioned that they have often run into some form of disagreement between explanations
generated by different methods for the same prediction. We found that data scientists consider explanations
to disagree when:
Top features are different:
Most popular post hoc explanation methods return feature importance values
for each feature. These values indicate which features contribute most (either positively or negatively) to the
prediction, i.e., top features. 21 out of the 25 participants (84%) mentioned that such a set of top features is
"the most critical piece of information" that they rely on in their day-to-day workflow. They also noted that
they typically look at the top 5 to 10 features provided by an explanation for each prediction. When two
explanations have different sets of top features, they consider it to be a disagreement.
Ordering among top features is different:
18 out of 25 participants (72%) indicated that they also
consider the ordering among the top features very carefully in their workflow. Therefore, they consider a
mismatch in the ordering of the top features provided by two different explanations to be a disagreement.
Direction of top feature contributions is different:
19 out of 25 participants (76%) mentioned that the
sign or direction of the feature contribution (i.e., whether the feature contributes positively or negatively to
the prediction) is another critical piece of information. Any mismatch in the signs of the top features between
two explanations is a sign of disagreement. As one participant remarked: "I saw an explanation indicating
that a top feature bankruptcy contributes positively to a particular loan denial, and another explanation saying
that it contributes negatively. That is a clear disagreement. The model prediction can be trusted with the
former explanation, but not with the latter.".
Relative ordering of features of interest is different:
16 of our study participants (64%) indicated that
they also look at relative ordering between certain features of interest, and that, they consider explanations
to disagree if explanations provide contradicting information about this aspect. As one participant remarked:
"I often check if salary is more important than credit score in loan approvals. If one explanation says salary
is more important than credit score, and another says credit score is more important than salary; then it is a
disagreement."
4
