Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
The Disagreement Problem in Explainable Machine Learning:
A Practitioner’s Perspective
Satyapriya Krishna‹
skrishna@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Tessa Han‹
than@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Alex Gu
gua@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Steven Wu
zstevenwu@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Shahin Jabbari
shahin@drexel.edu
Drexel University
Himabindu Lakkaraju
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu
Harvard University
‹ These authors contributed equally to this work.
Reviewed on OpenReview: https://openreview.net/forum?id=jESY2WTZCe
Abstract
As various post hoc explanation methods are increasingly being leveraged to explain complex
models in high-stakes settings, it becomes critical to develop a deeper understanding of if
and when the explanations output by these methods disagree with each other, and how such
disagreements are resolved in practice. However, there is little to no research that provides
answers to these critical questions. In this work, we introduce and study the disagreement
problem in explainable machine learning. More specifically, we formalize the notion of
disagreement between explanations, analyze how often such disagreements occur in practice,
and how practitioners resolve these disagreements. We first conduct interviews with data
scientists to understand what constitutes disagreement between explanations generated by
different methods for the same model prediction and introduce a novel quantitative framework
to formalize this understanding. We then leverage this framework to carry out a rigorous
empirical analysis with four real-world datasets, six state-of-the-art post hoc explanation
methods, and six different predictive models, to measure the extent of disagreement between
the explanations generated by various popular explanation methods. In addition, we carry out
an online user study with data scientists to understand how they resolve the aforementioned
disagreements. Our results indicate that (1) state-of-the-art explanation methods often
disagree in terms of the explanations they output, and (2) machine learning practitioners
often employ ad hoc heuristics when resolving such disagreements. These findings suggest
that practitioners may be relying on misleading explanations when making consequential
decisions. They also underscore the importance of developing principled frameworks for
effectively evaluating and comparing explanations output by various explanation techniques.
1
arXiv:2202.01602v6  [cs.LG]  17 Apr 2025
