the training phase and improve the performance of lightweight
models succinctly and effectively without heavy networks.
Based on the above analysis, we propose LNet-SKD for
NID, which is a lightweight approach composed of LNet
and SKD. LNet is a succinct but effective model stacked
by several lightweight DeepMax blocks for the feature pro-
cess. Furthermore, batch-wise SKD is employed to provide
the regularization of training consistency, which improves
the detection capability significantly. Compared with existing
methods, LNet-SKD achieves superior performance with the
trade-off between efficiency and accuracy (See Fig. 1). Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
1) We propose the DeepMax with a meticulous design
which is composed of MFM and DSConv, to reduce
the model complexity while achieving efficient feature
extraction and compact representation.
2) We propose the LNet by stacking DeepMax blocks for
NID, which realizes satisfactory performance with lower
model storage and computational cost.
3) We utilize SKD to guide the LNet to obtain more
instantaneous and coherent knowledge. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to use SKD in NID to
cover the performance drop incurred by lightweight.
4) Extensive experiments have shown that our LNet-SKD
has significant advantages in accuracy and efficiency
on challenging NSL-KDD and CICIDS-2017 datasets
compared to state-of-the-art methods.
II. RELATED WORK
Network intrusion detection is one of the most effective
approaches for network security defense. Traditional IDSs are
based on fixed or dynamic rules to detect network attacks,
which are only suitable for relatively simple scenarios and are
difficult to deal with unknown security risks [16]. With the
development of Machine Learning (ML), almost all related
algorithms have been applied to NID, such as KNN [17], SVM
[18], and LightGBM [19]. However, they can no longer resist
the increasingly complex and diverse network threats due to
limited learning ability [20].
In recent years, DL has shown promising potential in
learning inherent rules and the representation of samples and
has been used to extract features from abnormal traffic in an
end-to-end manner. [4] proposed a deep learning approach
for intrusion detection using the Convolution Neural Network
(CNN). The proposed method effectively recognized abnormal
traffic with higher accuracy than ML-based IDSs. However, it
performed poorly against the minority classes in multi-class
classification. Imrana et al. [5] proposed a bidirectional Long-
Short-Term-Memory (BiDLSTM) based intrusion detection
system to improve the detection rate of minority classes.
D’Angelo et al. [21] embedded the autoencoder into the con-
volution neural network and recurrent neural network to obtain
elicit relevant knowledge about the relations existing among
the spatial features and temporal features, which are used to
help improve the performance for network traffic classification.
Belarbi et al. [6] developed a multi-class classification IDS
based on Deep Belief Network (DBN) by stacking multiple
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs), and its performance
has been verified with the CICIDS2017 dataset.
Complex networks provide high detection accuracy for IDS
but bring challenges to deployment with resource-constrained
devices. To address this problem, [7] designed a lighter model
by modifying the existing paradigm, which results in a loss
of detection rate. Another popular solution is knowledge
distillation. Wang et al. [14] proposed a knowledge distillation
model to reduce the complexity of the model. Although the
teacher model does improve the performance of the student
model, it is challenging to design appropriate teacher and
student models. Instead, our approach does not require a
teacher model, distillation is conducted batch-wise, in which
soft knowledge is propagated batch by batch.
III. THE PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section, we present a detailed discussion of the
proposed lightweight self-knowledge distillation approach for
network intrusion detection. Fig. 2(a) displays the frame-
work of our approach, which comprises two essential parts.
First, we propose the LNet by stacking lightweight DeepMax
blocks which are carefully designed for feature extraction
and selection without redundant parameters. LNet is able to
extract the robust feature representation of intrusion behavior
with lower computation overhead. Second, batch-wise self-
knowledge distillation is introduced to instruct the LNet to
acquire instantaneous and effective knowledge.
A. Preliminary
Given an M-classes labeled dataset containing N train-
ing instances, D = {(x1, y1) , (x2, y2) , . . . , (xN, yN)}. Let
Bt = {(xt
1, yt
1) , (xt
2, yt
2) , . . . , (xt
n, yt
n)} be a batch set of
tth iteration during the training process, where n ≪N.
Furthermore, we define a base NID model as Mθ, which is
parameterized by θ. For each input sample (x, y), the encoder
extracts the feature representation F ∈RH×W , where W and
H denote the spatial width and height of the corresponding
feature map. We note the output logits z = M(x|θ) ∈RM. In
this paper, both teacher and student adopt the same architecture
Mθ for self-knowledge distillation.
B. LNet
In NID, CNNs have been widely used due to their excellent
feature extraction ability. Our motivation comes from the
observation that the CNN-based models proposed for NID
have constantly been growing larger, which hinders the deploy-
ment of edge devices. Hence, we propose an efficient feature
processing block DeepMax and further build the lightweight
LNet model by stacking it, as shown in Fig. 2. Under this
structure, the computing overhead can be significantly reduced,
and extract features effectively with generalization.
The core component of LNet is the DeepMax block,
which is based on Depthwise Separable Convolution (DSConv)
layer and Max-Feature-Map (MFM) layer. As illustrated
in Fig. 2(b), DSConv factorizes the standard convolution
