A Lightweight Approach for Network Intrusion
Detection based on Self-Knowledge Distillation
Shuo Yang∗†, Xinran Zheng∗†, Zhengzhuo Xu∗, and Xingjun Wang∗‡
∗Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
Abstract—Network Intrusion Detection (NID) works as a ker-
nel technology for the security network environment, obtaining
extensive research and application. Despite enormous efforts by
researchers, NID still faces challenges in deploying on resource-
constrained devices. To improve detection accuracy while reduc-
ing computational costs and model storage simultaneously, we
propose a lightweight intrusion detection approach based on
self-knowledge distillation, namely LNet-SKD, which achieves
the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. Specifically, we
carefully design the DeepMax block to extract compact repre-
sentation efficiently and construct the LNet by stacking DeepMax
blocks. Furthermore, considering compensating for performance
degradation caused by the lightweight network, we adopt batch-
wise self-knowledge distillation to provide the regularization
of training consistency. Experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed LNet-SKD, which
outperforms existing state-of-the-art techniques with fewer pa-
rameters and lower computation loads.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection, deep learning, lightweight
network, self-knowledge distillation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accompanied by the rapid development of network tech-
nology, various network attacks emerge with more serious and
huge threats [1]. As a response, Network Intrusion Detection
(NID) plays an essential role in providing the desired security
by constantly monitoring malicious and suspicious activities in
network traffic. Nowadays, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
have been widely used in military, medical, transportation, IoT,
industrial control systems, and other fields [2].
IDSs apply two types of detection manners, signature-based
and anomaly-based [3]. The signature-based NID establishes
the knowledge base by state modeling or string matching in
advance and detects abnormal behavior by matching the data
flow with the existing signature. Signature-based NID shows
quite well performance on known attacks while failing to deal
with attacks that are not in the knowledge base. Compared with
it, anomaly-based NID has the ability to recognize unknown
attacks by measuring the deviation between the detected
activity and normal ones, which is vigorously developing.
With the success of Deep Learning (DL), numerous DL-
based intrusion detection models [4]–[6] have been proposed
and promote the accuracy and robustness of intrusion detection
by a large margin. Despite the satisfactory accuracy these
models achieved, most of them are difficult to be implemented
on resource-constraint devices as high computational overhead
†Contributed Equally
‡Corresponding Author
Fig. 1. F1 score v.s. the number of model parameters on NSL-KDD datasets.
Each data point is visualized as a circle whose radius is proportional to
log(p), where p is the model’s FLOPs. Notice that LNet-SKD achieves the
best performance with satisfying model parameters and FLOPs.
and large model size. For example, DBN-based methods and
RNN-based methods need more parameters resulting in the
burden of storage (See Fig. 1).
Several schemes have been proposed to lighten the model
size for NID [7]–[9], where [7] designed a lightweight network
using depthwise convolution instead of standard convolution.
However, the reduction of network complexity is at the ex-
pense of ignoring the correlation of channels, which leads
to a decline in detection accuracy. In contrast, Depthwise
Separable Convolution (DSConv) [10] is more wildly used
that introduces point-wise convolution to combine features be-
tween channels. Furthermore, motivated by the observation of
the feature combination and selection ability of Max-Feature-
Map (MFM) [11], we present a simple yet novel network
structure named DeepMax block composed of DSConv and
MFM, which allows a NID model to reinforce representation
learning with lower computational cost.
To compensate for the performance degradation caused by
the lightweight, an intuitive solution uses Knowledge Distil-
lation (KD) [12]–[14] to optimize the shallow student models
by learning knowledge extracted from large and deep teacher
models. However, we notice that student performance is highly
dependent on the teacher models, which requires extra network
design and results in additional training burdens to NID. To
ameliorate it, we apply Self-Knowledge Distillation (SKD)
[15] to obtain the instantaneous knowledge generated during
arXiv:2307.10191v1  [cs.CR]  9 Jul 2023
