LNetֺֺ
−2
Iteration t-2
DSConv
Depthwise Convolution
Pointwise Convolution
Decision Boundary
LNet
z
DSConv
MFM
Pooling
max
LNet-SKD
DeepMax
（a）The framework of LNet-SKD   
（b）Deep Separable Convolution   
（c）DeepMax block   
ℒ푆ƵƮ
ℒ푆ƵƮ
Iteration t-1
ℒƭƬ
Logits
LNet
Iteration t
Input data
Fig. 2. The overview of proposed LNet-SKD for network intrusion detection. (a) The soft prediction in the last iteration will guide current iteration training.
(b) Each filter kernel only calculates with the corresponding feature map. (c) Channels and feature sizes will be half with the DeepMax block.
into depth-wise convolution and point-wise convolution. The
depth-wise convolution operation extracts each channel’s fea-
ture with separate kernels, which reduces the computation
drastically. Then, point-wise convolution is used to match the
output feature channel, which is implemented as 1 × 1 kernel
convolution. The whole process for Ci input and Co output
channels can be written as:
Fnew
j
= 1
Ci
· Kp
j ∗
Ci−1
X
i=0
Kd
i ∗Fold
i
, j ∈[0, ..., Co −1],
(1)
where ∗indicates convolutional operation, K is the corre-
sponding kernel and F is the feature map.
To further reduce the network size, we concatenate the
MFM layer after the aforementioned DSConv layer to half
the channel numbers. As shown in Fig. 2(c), MFM applies
Eq. 2 to combine two feature maps and output the maximum
value of each element, thus focusing the network on prominent
elements.
Fnew
i
(x, y) = max
h
Fold
i
(x, y), Fold
i+C/2(x, y)
i
,
(2)
where i ∈[0, C/2 −1] and C is current number of channels.
Finally, we add a pooling layer to reduce the feature map
size and construct the complete DeepMax block. Through ef-
fective feature extraction and selection, compact representation
can be obtained with satisfactory computational consumption.
To be implemented as a lightweight network for intrusion
detection, it is enough to stack only two DeepMax blocks
with a liner layer in LNet to achieve state-of-the-art results.
C. Complexity analysis
Here, we give an in-depth analysis of how LNet reduces the
model size and saves the FLOPs. Consider an input feature
map F ∈RH×W and in / out channel Ci / Co. In the
standard convolution block, the filtering and combination steps
are performed upon all input channels, and the number of
parameters is Ci × K × K × Co, where K denotes the kernel
size. In contrast, our DeepMax block conducts separable
convolution for each input channel and an additional 1 × 1
convolution to create a linear combination to match the output
channel. Considering no extra parameters are introduced in the
MFM or pooling operation, the total parameter number in the
whole block is Ci × K × K + Ci × 1 × 1 × Co. It is clear that
the DeepMax only needs Ci × (K2 + Co) gradient-required
parameters, which is less than classical ones Ci × (K2 × Co)
by a large margin. For the computational cost, the DeepMax
block narrows half the channel number by the MFM module
and half the output feature size by the pooling layer if the
pooling size is 2 × 2.
D. Self-Knowledge Distillation
To compensate for the performance drop incurred by model
compression, we adopt the batch-wise self-knowledge distil-
lation strategy inspired by [15], which improves the gener-
alization ability by learning sample-level soft labels given
by skillful teacher models. Specifically, the soft prediction
of the last iteration is used as the smooth label for self-
distillation to provide instantaneous distillation for each batch
of training samples, which leads to the regularization of
training consistency. As shown in Fig. 2(a), for each input
sample(x, y), the LNet will produce the predicted distribution
p = {p1, · · · , pm} ∈RM by the suggested softmax function
[12].
pi(x; τ) =
exp (zi(x)/τ)
P
j exp (zj(x)/τ),
(3)
where τ denotes the temperature scale to soften the probability
distribution for better distillation. Considering the imbalance
of intrusion detection datasets, we use a class-balanced cross-
