traffic. A certain amount of outbound bandwidth can 
then be allocated to traffic classes, so each connection 
point can be restricted on the bandwidth to share the link. 
CBQ showed maintenance of QoS during a DDoS 
attack on groups of web servers. Resource Pricing also 
proposes a distributed gateway architecture and a 
payment protocol that charges dynamically variable 
prices on network, server, and information resources. It 
identifies clients by allotting a priority mechanism to 
desirable clients and punishing clients who cause a load 
on the server. Finally, Throttling is a technique used in 
which traffic that passes through the router to the source 
is limited by the throttle rate. Only the strong flows that 
do not respect their quota rates are penalized and no 
other flows. One of the most recent promising 
techniques to mitigate DDoS attacks is Moving Target 
Defense (MTD). MTD is an emerging defensive 
technology used to enhance network security by making 
it difficult for attackers to know their targeted node (i.e., 
Web Application Server). Hence, it promotes instability 
and randomness by modifying the system's attack 
surface to confuse the attackers, increasing the cost and 
effort required to conduct such attacks [4]. 
This research mainly focuses on developing a 
machine-learning technique to detect DDoS attacks. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Supervised and unsupervised learning for DDoS 
detection and the performance of Botnet DDOS attack 
detection using machine learning techniques was 
presented in [5]. Support Vector Machine (SVM), 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Naïve Bayes (NB), 
Decision Tree (DT), and Unsupervised Learning 
(USML) were used in the experiments. The experiments 
show that the accuracy for Unsupervised Machine 
learning was the highest, followed by the Decision tree 
and Support Vector Machine. The main issue is the 
unknown size of the used sample. 
A botnet detection framework with sequential 
architecture based on machine learning was proposed for 
detecting attacks on IoT environments [6]. The 
correlated-feature selection method was adopted to 
decrease the unrelated features. The proposed model 
reached an accuracy of 99% in detecting DDOS attacks. 
The results show that ANN reaches the same accuracy 
as the hybrid model in multiple tests [7].  
Likewise, Machine learning techniques were used to 
detect malware due to their high accuracy in detecting 
malware behavior. K-nearest neighbors, random forests, 
support vector machines and deep neural networks were 
used to differentiate between normal flows and DDoS 
attacks. The honeypot framework was used to detect 
malware installation attempts into the IoT device. 
Honeypot trains the model to learn the different malware 
traffic flows and activities. A key drawback was that the 
results of machine learning techniques were not 
presented, in addition to the lack of information about 
the used dataset [2]. 
In [1], a hybrid intrusion detection system for DDoS 
attacks based on clustering and classification techniques 
is presented. To identify DDoS attacks, the authors 
grouped related network traffic flows using the K-means 
clustering technique and then classified these flows as 
either normal or attack traffic using SVMs. The 
suggested hybrid IDS detected DDoS assaults with a 
96.43% accuracy rate.  
A machine learning approach for DDoS detection in 
software-defined networks is presented in [3]. The 
authors classified network traffic flows as either normal 
or attack traffic using a mix of SVM, Random Forest, 
and k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algorithms. The 
suggested method detected DDoS assaults with a 99 % 
accuracy rate. 
DDoS attack detection with feature selection using 
machine learning algorithms is presented in [4]. This 
study presented a DDoS attack detection system that 
uses feature selection methods to find the most pertinent 
features for categorization. The authors classified 
network traffic flows as either normal or attack traffic 
using SVM, Naive Bayes, and Decision Tree methods. 
The suggested method detected DDoS assaults with a 
98.9% accuracy rate. Moreover, a machine learning-
based intelligent DDoS assault detection system is 
presented in [8]. In this research, they presented an 
intelligent method for detecting DDoS attacks. In order 
to categorize network traffic flows as either regular or 
attack traffic, the authors employed the SVM algorithm. 
The suggested system's DDoS attack detection accuracy 
was 99 %. 
III. BACKGROUND 
A. DDoS attacks 
DOS is an abbreviation for Denial of Service, which 
means that blocking a specific service leads to 
suspending that service. For example, stopping the 
HTTP service on a web server means stopping browsing 
the sites, and stopping the FTP service leads to the 
suspension of the FTP connection service on the server.  
A DOS attack is executed using several techniques, 
including massive traffic or exploiting vulnerabilities 
such as the Apache http Remote Denial of Service 
(memory exhaustion) vulnerability. DDoS is an 
abbreviation for Distributed Denial of Service. These 
attacks can be divided into three main categories: 
Volume based attacks, which include ICMP floods, 
UDP floods, and other spoofed packet attacks. Protocol-
based attacks include SYN floods, fragmented packet 
attacks, Ping of death, Smurf attacks and more. 
Application layer-based attacks, which include attacks 
like Zero-day attacks [1]. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on August 06,2026 at 16:16:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
