traffic. ML modules are used to classify the traffic into 
attack or non-attack traffic to detect DDoS based on the  
 
Fig. 3. proposed system architecture. 
A. Dataset 
To train our ML model, we used the CI-CDDoS2019 
dataset [7]. It contains 12 different types of DDoS 
attacks, and each type is in a separate file. The attack 
types are UDP, SNMP, NetBIOS, LDAP, TFTP, NTP, 
SYN, Web DDoS, MSSQL, UDP-Lag, DNS, and SSDP 
DDoS-based attacks. The data is labeled as benign and 
DDoS. The CI-CDDoS2019 dataset is a publicly 
available dataset that was released in 2019 by the 
Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. It contains network 
traffic data collected from a real-world network 
environment that was subjected to various DDoS 
attacks. The dataset also includes labeled data for each 
attack type, as well as benign traffic data, which can be 
used for training and testing ML-based DDoS detection 
models. The dataset provides a comprehensive set of 
attack scenarios and can be used to evaluate the 
performance of ML-based DDoS detection methods. 
B. Data Preprocessing  
The size of the dataset is 400,000 datapoints. To 
reduce the size before the Preprocessing phase, we 
removed the Flow ID, Source IP, Source Port, 
Destination IP, Destination Port, and Timestamp 
columns as they are unnecessary and have no effect on 
the result because these features are changed per case.  
Furthermore, we replace the labels with numerical 
values, where Benign' is represented as 0 and DDoS' 
with 1. 
Finally, we split the dataset first during data 
preparation and training to validation split. We did use a 
cross-validation set that is 15% the size of the training 
set. Since it helps to prepare the data for analysis and 
ensures that the ML model can accurately learn from it, 
data preprocessing is an important step in machine 
learning-based DDoS detection. The files' size is 
decreased to 400,000 data points in the first data 
preparation stage. This phase is essential to ensuring that 
the ML model can handle the data effectively and lower 
the computational complexity of the model. Several 
columns are eliminated from the dataset in the second 
stage since they are unique to each network and do not 
contain any data that can be used to identify DDoS. Flow 
ID, Source IP, Source Port, and Timestamp are among 
the fields in this table. The dataset's dimensionality is 
decreased by removing these columns. 
C. CNN-LSTM Model for DDoS Detection 
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and long 
short-term memory (LSTM) are used in DDoS 
Detection. CNN is a deep learning model for processing 
data with a grid pattern, such as pictures. The first two 
layers are convolutional and max pooling to extract 
features, whereas the fully connected layer transfers the 
extracted features into the final output, which is 
classification. Convolutional, max-pooling, and fully 
connected layers are essential to CNN. Our CNN-LSTM 
architecture consists of 11 layers. Figure 4 shows a 
CNN-LSTM architecture.  
 
Fig. 4. CNN-LSTM architecture 
The first layer only reshapes the incoming array to 
the required shape. Our input data has 67 features. So, 
the reshape layer makes an input shape of (67, 1), where 
1 is the batch size. Next are the convolutional layers. 
They have filtered the filters. We have 64 filtered 
conv1D layer that moves along 67 data dimensions with 
a stride length of 2, so they each would have to move 
(2*2*64) = 256 trainable parameters. And each of them 
would again have more filters in the next layers. So, it 
increases exponentially. The max pooling layer is added 
to decrease the number of parameters to take only the 
max of the values in the window.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on August 06,2026 at 16:16:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
