 
CNN-LSTM based Approach for DDoS Detection 
 
 
Tahani Alasmari 
Department of Computer Science 
Collage of Computer Science and 
Engineering University of Jeddah 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
2000118@uj.edu.sa 
Ala’ Eshmawi 
Department of Cybersecurity 
Collage of Computer Science and 
Engineering University of Jeddah 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
aaeshmawi@uj.edu.sa 
 
Lobna Hsairi 
Department of Computer Science 
Collage of Computer Science and 
Engineering University of Jeddah 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
LALHABIB@uj.edu.sa 
Adel Alshomrani 
Department of Cybersecurity 
Collage of Computer Science and 
Engineering University of Jeddah 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
asalshamrani@uj.edu.sa 
 
 
Abstract—Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
attacks have become increasingly common, causing 
financial and reputational losses for organizations. 
Despite the existence of numerous conventional detection 
solutions, DDoS attacks continue to rise in frequency, 
demanding effective models to detect and prevent them. 
This paper focuses on developing a machine learning-
based approach for DDoS attack detection. By leveraging 
the power of machine learning, we aim to overcome the 
limitations of existing methods and propose a novel 
solution. Our work emphasizes the importance of 
exploring advanced models and techniques to enhance 
detection accuracy and efficiency. Through rigorous 
experimentation, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our 
approach in proactive defense against real-world DDoS 
attacks. 
Keywords—DDOS, Detection, Machine learning 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Denial of Service attack (DoS) is an attack launched 
against networks and system resources to yield them 
unavailable to legitimate users. Therefore, this attack 
targets the availability of the systems, which is one of the 
essential things to protect. DoS attacks target web 
servers, default gateways, personal computers, etc., 
mostly by exploiting TCP/IP stack vulnerabilities. Some 
classic examples of DoS attacks are TCP Syn Flood, 
UDP Flood, ICMP Flood, Smurf, incomplete HTTP 
requests, etc. When multiple hosts coordinate to flood 
the victim with an abundance of attack packets 
simultaneously, it is called a Distributed Dos (DDoS) 
attack [1]. 
DDoS attacks may compromise online connected 
devices to generate a huge amount of network traffic 
targeting known services. These attacks are considered 
effective due to the ability to use multiple devices 
(botnets) infiltrated as a source of traffic to attack 
systems [1]. 
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are considered 
an effective approach to detecting and preventing DDoS 
attacks. They work by building models to differentiate 
normal and abnormal network traffic. The built model is 
then used to detect anomalies in the network. ML 
techniques can be model-driven, based on unsupervised 
or supervised algorithms. Supervised algorithms use 
historical data or labeled data to build the model. In 
contrast, unsupervised algorithms build the model by 
correlating upcoming data or putting new data into 
similar clusters. ML algorithms can be applied to DDoS 
detection and have been found to perform better than 
"signature-based" detection [2]. Beside ML algorithms, 
other DDoS prevention techniques are proposed [3]. An 
ingress filtering mechanism is used to monitor and 
restrict network traffic by allowing only legitimate 
traffic and blocking unauthorized traffic. Another 
mechanism used is Egress filtering. This mechanism 
monitors and restricts traffic that attempts to leave the 
network. This usually is done by a firewall that blocks 
packets that fail to meet certain security requirements. 
Moreover, History-based IP filtering uses a pre-built IP 
address dataset, and the edge router recognizes incoming 
packets accordingly.  
Finally, Honeypots lure attackers by allowing them 
to attack the honeypots and not the actual system. They 
also help in obtaining the attacker's information by 
storing their logs, the type of attack and the type of 
program used. As for DDoS mitigation, many 
techniques were proposed [3]. Differentiated services is 
a technology based on the type of service byte in the IP 
header and is used to classify and manage network traffic 
and provide Quality of Service (QoS) on modern IP 
networks. Administrators use the Differentiated Services 
Code Point field in the IP packet address to distinguish 
packets, which contain 64 features at the traffic class 
level. They are used to mitigate DDOS attacks by 
limiting traffic so that matching criteria can identify each 
type of volumetric attack currently observed in the wild. 
Secondly, Class-Based Queuing (CBQ) is another 
technique used that is based on the concept of Class 
Traffic (COT), which is a mutually exclusive subset of 
2023 Eighth International Conference On Mobile And Secure Services (MobiSecServ) | 979-8-3503-1649-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MOBISECSERV58080.2023.10329028
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on August 06,2026 at 16:16:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
