Gradient
SmoothGrad
Gradient   Input
Guided 
Back-propagation
GradCAM
Integrated Gradients
Integrated Gradients-SG
logits
conv2d_1a_3x3
mixed_7c
mixed_7b
conv2d_2a_3x3
conv2d_2b_3x3
conv2d_4a_3x3
mixed_7a
mixed_6e
mixed_6d
mixed_6c
mixed_6b
mixed_6a
mixed_5d
mixed_5c
mixed_5b
conv2d_3b_1x1
Original Explanation
Guided GradCAM
Independent ‘layer’ randomization
Original Image
Figure 3: Independent randomization on Inception v3 (ImageNet). Similar to Figure 2, however
each ‘layer’/‘block’ is randomized independently, i.e., the rest of the weights are kept at the pre-trained
values, while only each layer/block is randomized. Masks derived from these partially randomized
networks are shown here. We observe, again, that Guided Backprop is sensitive to only the lower
layer weights.
4
Data Randomization Test
The feasibility of accurate prediction hinges on the relationship between instances (e.g., images)
and labels encoded by the data. If we artiﬁcially break this relationship by randomizing the labels,
no predictive model can do better than random guessing. Our data randomization test evaluates the
sensitivity of an explanation method to the relationship between instances and labels. An explanation
method insensitive to randomizing labels cannot possibly explain mechanisms that depend on the
relationship between instances and labels present in the data generating process. For example, if an
explanation did not change after we randomly assigned diagnoses to CT scans, then evidently it did
not explain anything about the relationship between a CT scan and the correct diagnosis in the ﬁrst
place (see [32] for an application of Guided BackProp as part of a pipepline for shadow detection in
2D Ultrasound).
In our data randomization test, we permute the training labels and train a model on the randomized
training data. A model achieving high training accuracy on the randomized training data is forced to
memorize the randomized labels without being able to exploit the original structure in the data. As it
turns out, state-of-the art deep neural networks can easily ﬁt random labels as was shown in Zhang
et al. [31].
In our experiments, we permute the training labels for each model and data set pair, and train the
model to greater than 95% training set accuracy. Note that the test accuracy is never better than
randomly guessing a label (up to sampling error). For each resulting model, we then compute
explanations on the same test bed of inputs for a model trained with true labels and the corresponding
model trained on randomly permuted labels.
Gradient is sensitive. We ﬁnd, again, that gradients, and its smoothgrad variant, undergo substan-
tial changes. We also observe that GradCAM masks undergo changes that result in masks with
disconnected patches.
Sole reliance on the visual inspection can be misleading. For Guided BackProp, we observe a
visual change; however, we ﬁnd that the masks still highlight portions of the input that would seem
plausible, given correspondence with the input, on naive visual inspection. For example, from the
diverging masks (Figure 6-Right), we see that the Guided BackProp mask still assigns positive
relevance across most of the digit for the network trained on random labels.
6
