Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps
Julius Adebayo∗, Justin Gilmer♯, Michael Muelly♯, Ian Goodfellow♯, Moritz Hardt♯†, Been Kim♯
juliusad@mit.edu, {gilmer,muelly,goodfellow,mrtz,beenkim}@google.com
♯Google Brain
†University of California Berkeley
Abstract
Saliency methods have emerged as a popular tool to highlight features in an input
deemed relevant for the prediction of a learned model. Several saliency methods
have been proposed, often guided by visual appeal on image data. In this work, we
propose an actionable methodology to evaluate what kinds of explanations a given
method can and cannot provide. We ﬁnd that reliance, solely, on visual assessment
can be misleading. Through extensive experiments we show that some existing
saliency methods are independent both of the model and of the data generating
process. Consequently, methods that fail the proposed tests are inadequate for
tasks that are sensitive to either data or model, such as, ﬁnding outliers in the data,
explaining the relationship between inputs and outputs that the model learned,
and debugging the model. We interpret our ﬁndings through an analogy with
edge detection in images, a technique that requires neither training data nor model.
Theory in the case of a linear model and a single-layer convolutional neural network
supports our experimental ﬁndings2.
1
Introduction
As machine learning grows in complexity and impact, much hope rests on explanation methods as
tools to elucidate important aspects of learned models [1, 2]. Explanations could potentially help
satisfy regulatory requirements [3], help practitioners debug their model [4, 5], and perhaps, reveal
bias or other unintended effects learned by a model [6, 7]. Saliency methods3 are an increasingly
popular class of tools designed to highlight relevant features in an input, typically, an image. Despite
much excitement, and signiﬁcant recent contribution [8–21], the valuable effort of explaining machine
learning models faces a methodological challenge: the difﬁculty of assessing the scope and quality
of model explanations. A paucity of principled guidelines confound the practitioner when deciding
between an abundance of competing methods.
We propose an actionable methodology based on randomization tests to evaluate the adequacy
of explanation approaches. We instantiate our analysis on several saliency methods for image
classiﬁcation with neural networks; however, our methodology applies in generality to any explanation
approach. Critically, our proposed randomization tests are easy to implement, and can help assess the
suitability of an explanation method for a given task at hand.
In a broad experimental sweep, we apply our methodology to numerous existing saliency methods,
model architectures, and data sets. To our surprise, some widely deployed saliency methods are
independent of both the data the model was trained on, and the model parameters. Consequently,
∗Work done during the Google AI Residency Program.
2All code to replicate our ﬁndings will be available here: https://goo.gl/hBmhDt
3We refer here to the broad category of visualization and attribution methods aimed at interpreting trained
models. These methods are often used for interpreting deep neural networks particularly on image data.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
arXiv:1810.03292v3  [cs.CV]  6 Nov 2020
