Current assessment methods.
Both Samek et al. [29] and Montavon et al. [30] proposed an input
perturbation procedure for assessing the quality of saliency methods. Dabkowski and Gal [17]
proposed an entropy based metric to quantify the amount of relevant information an explanation
mask captures. Performance of a saliency map on an object localization task has also been used for
assessing saliency methods. Montavon et al. [30] discuss explanation continuity and selectivity as
measures of assessment.
Randomization.
Our label randomization test was inspired by the work of Zhang et al. [31],
although we use the test for an entirely different purpose.
2.2
Visualization & Similarity Metrics
We discuss our visualization approach and overview the set of metrics used in assessing similarity
between two explanations.
Visualization.
We visualize saliency maps in two ways. In the ﬁrst case, absolute-value (ABS), we
take absolute values of a normalized map. For the second case, diverging visualization, we leave the
map as is, and use different colors to show positive and negative importance.
Similarity Metrics.
For quantitative comparison, we rely on the following metrics: Spearman rank
correlation with absolute value (absolute value), Spearman rank correlation without absolute value
(diverging), the structural similarity index (SSIM), and the Pearson correlation of the histogram of
gradients (HOGs) derived from two maps. We compute the SSIM and HOGs similarity metric on
ImageNet examples without absolute values4. SSIM and Pearson correlation of HOGs have been
used in literature to remove duplicate images and quantify image similarity. Ultimately, quantifying
human visual perception is still an active area of research.
3
Model Parameter Randomization Test
The parameter settings of a model encode what the model has learned from the data during training.
In particular, model parameters have a strong effect on test performance of the model. Consequently,
for a saliency method to be useful for debugging a model, it ought to be sensitive to model parameters.
As an illustrative example, consider a linear function of the form f(x) = w1x1 + w2x2 with input
x ∈R2. A gradient-based explanation for the model’s behavior for input x is given by the parameter
values (w1, w2), which correspond to the sensitivity of the function to each of the coordinates.
Changes in the model parameters therefore change the explanation.
Our proposed model parameter randomization test assesses an explanation method’s sensitivity
to model parameters. We conduct two kinds of randomization. First we randomly re-initialize
all weights of the model both completely and in a cascading fashion. Second, we independently
randomize a single layer at a time while keeping all others ﬁxed. In both cases, we compare the
resulting explanation from a network with random weights to the one obtained with the model’s
original weights.
3.1
Cascading Randomization
Overview. In the cascading randomization, we randomize the weights of a model starting from the
top layer, successively, all the way to the bottom layer. This procedure destroys the learned weights
from the top layers to the bottom ones. Figure 2 shows masks, for several saliency methods, for an
example input for the cascading randomization on an Inception v3 model trained on ImageNet. In
Figure 4, we show the two Spearman (absolute value and no-absolute value) metrics across different
data sets and architectures. Finally, in Figure 5, we show the SSIM and HOGs similarity metrics.
The gradient shows sensitivity while Guided Backprop is invariant to higher layer weights.
We ﬁnd that the gradient map is, indeed, sensitive to model parameter randomization. Similarly,
GradCAM is sensitive to model weights if the randomization is downstream of the last convolutional
layer. However, Guided Backprop (along with Guided GradCAM) is invariant to higher layer weights.
4We refer readers to the appendix for a discussion on calibration of these metrics.
4
