A.6
SmoothGrad
Given an explanation, E, from one of the methods previously discussed, a sample x, the SmoothGrad explanation,
Esg, is deﬁned as follows:
Esg(x) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
E(x + gi),
where noise vectors gi ∼N(0, σ2)) are drawn i.i.d. from a normal distribution.
A.7
VarGrad
Similar to SmoothGrad, and as referenced in [37] a variance analog of SmoothGrad can be deﬁned as follows:
Evg(x) = V(E(x + gi)),
where noise vectors gi ∼N(0, σ2)) are drawn i.i.d. from a normal distribution, and V corresponds to the
variance. In the visualizations presented here, explanations with VG correspond to the VarGrad equivalent of
such masks. Seo et al. [38] theoretically analyze VarGrad showing that it is independent of the gradient, and
captures higher order partial derivatives.
B
DNN Architecture, Training, Randomization & Metrics
Experimental Details Data sets & Models. We perform our randomization tests on a variety of datasets and
models as follows: an Inception v3 model [39] trained on the ImageNet classiﬁcation dataset [40] for object
recognition, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained on MNIST [41] and Fashion MNIST [42], and a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), also trained on MNIST and Fashion MNIST.
Randomization Tests We perform 2 types of randomizations. For the model parameter randomization tests, we
re-initialized the parameters of each of the models with a truncated normal distribution. We replicated these
randomization for a uniform distribution and obtain identical results. For the random labels test, we randomize,
completely, the training labels for a each-model dataset pair (MNIST and Fashion MNIST) and then train the
model to greater than 95 percent training set accuracy. As expected the performance of these models on the tests
set is random.
Inception v3 trained on ImageNet.
For Inception v3, we used a pre-trained network that is widely
distributed with the tensorﬂow package available at: https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/
master/research/slim#Pretrained. This model has a 93.9 top-5 accuracy on the ImageNet test set. For
the randomization tests, we re-initialized on a per-block basis. As noted in [43], each inception block consists of
multiple ﬁlters of different sizes. In this case, we randomize all the the ﬁlter weights, biases, and batch-norm
variables for each inception block. In total, this randomization occurs in 17 phases.
CNN on MNIST and Fashion MNIST. The CNN architecture is as follows: input -> conv (5x5, 32) ->
pooling (2x2)-> conv (5x5, 64) -> pooling (2x2) -> fully connected (1024 units) -> softmax (10 units). We
train the model with the ADAM optimizer for 20 thousand iterations. All non-linearities used are ReLU. We also
apply weight decay (penalty 0.001) to the weights of the network. The ﬁnal test set accuracy of this model is
99.2 percent. For model parameter randomization test, we reinitialize each layer successively or independently
depending on the randomization experiment. The weight initialiazation scheme followed was a truncated normal
distribution (mean: 0, std: 0.01). We also tried a uniform distribution as well, and found that our results still
hold.
MLP trained on MNIST. The MLP architecture is as follows: input -> fully connected (2500 units) -> fully
connected (1500 units) -> fully connected (500 units) -> fully connected (10 units). We also train this model
with the ADAM optimizer for 20 thousand iterations. All non-linearities used are Relu. The ﬁnal test set accuracy
of this model is 98.7 percent. For randomization tests, we reinitialize each layer successively or independently
depending on the randomization experiment.
Inception v4 trained on Skeletal Radiograms. We also analyzed an inception v4 model trained on skeletal
radiograms obtained as part of the pediatric bone age challenge conducted by the radiological society of north
America. This inception v4 model was trained retained the standard original parameters except it was trained
with a mixed L1 and L2 loss. In our randomization test as indicated in ﬁgure 1, we reinitialize all weights, biases,
and variables of the model.
Calibration for Similarity Metrics. As noted in the methods section, we measure the similarity of the saliency
masks obtained using the following metrics: Spearman rank correlation with absolute value (absolute value),
Spearman rank correlation without absolute value (diverging), the structural similarity index (SSIM), and the
Pearson correlation of the histogram of gradients (HOGs) derived from two maps. The SSIM and HOGs metrics
14
