x ⊙v as noise increases. We conduct this experiment on Fashion MNIST and ImageNet samples.
We observe that the input does indeed dominate the product (see Figure 19 in Appendix). We also
observe that the input dominance persists even as the noisy gradient vectors change drastically. This
experiment indicates that methods that approximate the “input-times-gradient” mostly return the
input, in cases where the gradients look visually noisy as they tend to do.
5.3
Analysis for simple models
Gradient
Gradient 
SmoothGrad
GBP
IG
RGB
Gray Scale
Figure 7: Explanations derived for the
1-layer Sum-Pooling Convolution archi-
tecture. We show gradient, SmoothGrad,
Integrated Gradients and Guided Back-
Prop explanations.
To better understand our ﬁndings, we analyze the output of
the saliency methods tested on two simple models: a linear
model and a 1-layer sum pooling convolutional network.
We ﬁnd that the output of the saliency methods, on a
linear model, returns a coefﬁcient that intuitively measures
the sensitivity of the model with respect to that variable.
However, these methods applied to a random convolution
seem to result in visual artifacts that are akin to an edge
detector.
Linear Model.
Consider a linear model f : Rd →R
deﬁned as f(x) = w · x where w ∈Rd are the model
weights. For gradients we have Egrad(x) = ∂(w·x)
∂x
= w.
Similarly for SmoothGrad we have Esg(x) = w (the gradi-
ent is independent of the input, so averaging gradients over
noisy inputs yields the same model weight). Integrated
Gradients reduces to “gradient ⊙input” for this case:
EIG(x) = (x −¯x) ⊙
Z 1
0
∂f(¯x + α(x −¯x))
∂x
dα
= (x −¯x) ⊙
Z 1
0
wαdα = (x −¯x) ⊙w/2 .
Consequently, we see that the application of the basic gradient method to a linear model will pass our
sanity check. Gradients on a random model will return an image of white noise, while integrated
gradients will return a noisy version of the input image. We did not consider Guided Backprop and
GradCAM here because both methods are not deﬁned for the linear model considered above.
1 Layer Sum-Pool Conv Model.
We now show that the application of these same methods to a
1-layer convolutional network may result in visual artifacts that can be misleading unless further
analysis is done. Consider a single-layer convolutional network applied to a grey-scale image
x ∈Rn×n. Let w ∈R3×3 denote the 3 × 3 convolutional ﬁlter, indexed as wij for i, j ∈{−1, 0, 1}.
We denote by w ∗x ∈Rn×n the output of the convolution operation on the image x. Then the output
of this network can be written as l(x) =
nP
i=1
nP
j=1
σ(w ∗x)ij , where σ is the ReLU non-linearity
applied point-wise. In particular, this network applies a single 3x3 convolutional ﬁlter to the input
image, then applies a ReLU non-linearity and ﬁnally sum-pools over the entire convolutional layer
for the output. This is a similar architecture to the one considered in [34]. As shown in Figure 7, we
see that different saliency methods do act like edge detectors. This suggests that the convolutional
structure of the network is responsible for the edge detecting behavior of some of these saliency
methods.
To understand why saliency methods applied to this simple architecture visually appear to be edge
detectors, we consider the closed form of the gradient
∂
∂xij l(x). Let aij = 1 {(w ∗x)ij ≥0} indicate
the activation pattern of the ReLU units in the convolutional layer. Then for i, j ∈[2, n −1] we have
∂
∂xij
l(x) =
1
X
k=−1
1
X
l=−1
σ′((w ∗x)i+k,j+l)wkl =
1
X
k=−1
1
X
l=−1
ai+k,j+lwkl
(Recall that σ′(x) = 0 if x < 0 and 1 otherwise). This implies that the 3 × 3 activation pattern local
to pixel xij uniquely determines
∂
∂xij . It is now clear why edges will be visible in the produced
9
