Original 
Image
Gradient
SmoothGrad
Guided 
BackProp
Guided 
GradCAM
Integrated 
Gradients
Integrated 
Gradients 
SmoothGrad
Gradient 
Input 
Edge 
Detector
Junco 
Bird
Corn
Wheaten 
Terrier
Figure 1: Saliency maps for some common methods compared to an edge detector. Saliency
masks for 3 different inputs for an Inception v3 model trained on ImageNet. We see that an edge
detector produces outputs that are strikingly similar to the outputs of some saliency methods. In
fact, edge detectors can also produce masks that highlight features which coincide with what appears
to be relevant to a model’s class prediction. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the methods that are most
similar to an edge detector, i.e., Guided Backprop and its variants, show minimal sensitivity to our
randomization tests.
these methods are incapable of assisting with tasks that depend on the model, such as debugging the
model, or tasks that depend on the relationships between inputs and outputs present in the data.
To illustrate the point, Figure 1 compares the output of standard saliency methods with those of an
edge detector. The edge detector does not depend on model or training data, and yet produces results
that bear visual similarity with saliency maps. This goes to show that visual inspection is a poor
guide in judging whether an explanation is sensitive to the underlying model and data.
Our methodology derives from the idea of a statistical randomization test, comparing the natural
experiment with an artiﬁcially randomized experiment. We focus on two instantiations of our general
framework: a model parameter randomization test, and a data randomization test.
The model parameter randomization test compares the output of a saliency method on a trained
model with the output of the saliency method on a randomly initialized untrained network of the
same architecture. If the saliency method depends on the learned parameters of the model, we should
expect its output to differ substantially between the two cases. Should the outputs be similar, however,
we can infer that the saliency map is insensitive to properties of the model, in this case, the model
parameters. In particular, the output of the saliency map would not be helpful for tasks such as model
debugging that inevitably depend on the model.
The data randomization test compares a given saliency method applied to a model trained on a
labeled data set with the method applied to the same model architecture but trained on a copy of the
data set in which we randomly permuted all labels. If a saliency method depends on the labeling of
the data, we should again expect its outputs to differ signiﬁcantly in the two cases. An insensitivity to
the permuted labels, however, reveals that the method does not depend on the relationship between
instances (e.g. images) and labels that exists in the original data.
Speaking more broadly, any explanation method admits a set of invariances, i.e., transformations
of data and model that do not change the output of the method. If we discover an invariance that is
incompatible with the requirements of the task at hand, we can safely reject the method. As such, our
tests can be thought of as sanity checks to perform before deploying a method in practice.
Our contributions
1.
We propose two concrete, easy to implement tests for assessing the scope and quality of
explanation methods: the model parameter randomization test, and the data randomization test. Both
tests applies broadly to explanation methods.
2. We conduct extensive experiments with several explanation methods across data sets and model
architectures, and ﬁnd, consistently, that some of the methods tested are independent of both the
model parameters and the labeling of the data that the model was trained on.
2
