3. Of the methods tested, Gradients & GradCAM pass the sanity checks, while Guided BackProp &
Guided GradCAM are invariant to higher layer parameters; hence, fail.
4. Consequently, our ﬁndings imply that the saliency methods that fail our proposed tests are incapable
of supporting tasks that require explanations that are faithful to the model or the data generating
process.
5. We interpret our ﬁndings through a series of analyses of linear models and a simple 1-layer
convolutional sum-pooling architecture, as well as a comparison with edge detectors.
2
Methods and Related Work
In our formal setup, an input is a vector x ∈Rd. A model describes a function S : Rd →RC,
where C is the number of classes in the classiﬁcation problem. An explanation method provides an
explanation map E : Rd →Rd that maps inputs to objects of the same shape.
We now brieﬂy describe some of the explanation methods we examine. The supplementary materials
contain an in-depth overview of these methods. Our goal is not to exhaustively evaluate all prior
explanation methods, but rather to highlight how our methods apply to several cases of interest.
The gradient explanation for an input x is Egrad(x) = ∂S
∂x [22, 23, 8]. The gradient quantiﬁes how
much a change in each input dimension would a change the predictions S(x) in a small neighborhood
around the input.
Gradient ⊙Input. Another form of explanation is the element-wise product of the input and the
gradient, denoted x ⊙∂S
∂x , which can address “gradient saturation”, and reduce visual diffusion [13].
Integrated Gradients (IG) also addresses gradient saturation by summing over scaled versions of
the input [14]. IG for an input x is deﬁned as EIG(x) = (x −¯x) ×
R 1
0
∂S(¯x+α(x−¯x))
∂x
dα, where ¯x is
a “baseline input” that represents the absence of a feature in the original input x.
Guided Backpropagation (GBP) [9] builds on the “DeConvNet” explanation method [10] and
corresponds to the gradient explanation where negative gradient entries are set to zero while back-
propagating through a ReLU unit.
Guided GradCAM. Introduced by Selvaraju et al. [19], GradCAM explanations correspond to the
gradient of the class score (logit) with respect to the feature map of the last convolutional unit of a
DNN. For pixel level granularity GradCAM, can be combined with Guided Backpropagation through
an element-wise product.
SmoothGrad (SG) [16] seeks to alleviate noise and visual diffusion [14, 13] for saliency maps by
averaging over explanations of noisy copies of an input. For a given explanation map E, SmoothGrad
is deﬁned as Esg(x) = 1
N
PN
i=1 E(x + gi), where noise vectors gi ∼N(0, σ2) are drawn i.i.d. from
a normal distribution.
2.1
Related Work
Other Methods & Similarities.
Aside gradient-based approaches, other methods ‘learn’ an expla-
nation per sample for a model [20, 17, 12, 15, 11, 21]. More recently, Ancona et al. [24] showed that
for ReLU networks (with zero baseline and no biases) the ϵ-LRP and DeepLift (Rescale) explanation
methods are equivalent to the input ⊙gradient. Similarly, Lundberg and Lee [18] proposed SHAP
explanations which approximate the shapley value and unify several existing methods.
Fragility.
Ghorbani et al. [25] and Kindermans et al. [26] both present attacks against saliency
methods; showing that it is possible to manipulate derived explanations in unintended ways. Nie
et al. [27] theoretically assessed backpropagation based methods and found that Guided BackProp
and DeconvNet, under certain conditions, are invariant to network reparamaterizations, particularly
random Gaussian initialization. Speciﬁcally, they show that Guided BackProp and DeconvNet both
seem to be performing partial input recovery. Our ﬁndings are similar for Guided BackProp and
its variants. Further, our work differs in that we propose actionable sanity checks for assessing
explanation approaches. Along similar lines, Mahendran and Vedaldi [28] also showed that some
backpropagation-based saliency methods can often lack neuron discriminativity.
3
