saliency mask — regions in the image corresponding to an “edge” will have a distinct activation
pattern from surrounding pixels. In contrast, pixel regions of the image which are more uniform will
all have the same activation pattern, and thus the same value of
∂
∂xij l(x). Perhaps a similar principle
applies for stacked convolutional layers.
5.4
The case of edge detectors.
An edge detector, roughly speaking, is a classical tool to highlight sharp transitions in an image.
Notably, edge detectors are typically untrained and do not depend on any predictive model. They are
solely a function of the given input image. As some of the saliency methods we saw, edge detection
is invariant under model and data transformations.
In Figure 1 we saw that edge detectors produce images that are strikingly similar to the outputs of
some saliency methods. In fact, edge detectors can also produce pictures that highlight features which
coincide with what appears to be relevant to a model’s class prediction. However, here the human
observer is at risk of conﬁrmation bias when interpreting the highlighted edges as an explanation of
the class prediction. In Figure 37 (Appendix), we show a qualitative comparison of saliency maps of
an input image with the same input image multiplied element-wise by the output of an edge detector.
The result indeed looks strikingly similar, illustrating that saliency methods mostly use the edges of
the image.
While edge detection is a fundamental and useful image processing technique, it is typically not
thought of as an explanation method, simply because it involves no model or training data. In light of
our ﬁndings, it is not unreasonable to interpret some saliency methods as implicitly implementing
unsupervised image processing techniques, akin to edge detection, segmentation, or denoising. To
differentiate such methods from model-sensitive explanations, visual inspection is insufﬁcient.
6
Conclusion and future work
The goal of our experimental method is to give researchers guidance in assessing the scope of model
explanation methods. We envision these methods to serve as sanity checks in the design of new model
explanations. Our results show that visual inspection of explanations alone can favor methods that
may provide compelling pictures, but lack sensitivity to the model and the data generating process.
Invariances in explanation methods give a concrete way to rule out the adequacy of the method for
certain tasks. We primarily focused on invariance under model randomization, and label random-
ization. Many other transformations are worth investigating and can shed light on various methods
we did and did not evaluate. Along these lines, we hope that our paper is a stepping stone towards a
more rigorous evaluation of new explanation methods, rather than a verdict on existing methods.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Google PAIR team for open source implementation of the methods used in this work.
We thank Martin Wattenberg and other members of the Google Brain team for critical feedback
and helpful discussions that helped improved the work. Lastly, we thank anonymous reviewers for
feedback that helped improve the manuscript. We are also grateful to Leon Sixt for pointing out a
bug in our Guided Backprop experiments in an earlier version of this work.
References
[1] Alfredo Vellido, José David Martín-Guerrero, and Paulo JG Lisboa. Making machine learning models
interpretable. In ESANN, volume 12, pages 163–172. Citeseer, 2012.
[2] Finale Doshi-Velez, Mason Kortz, Ryan Budish, Chris Bavitz, Sam Gershman, David O’Brien, Stuart
Schieber, James Waldo, David Weinberger, and Alexandra Wood. Accountability of ai under the law: The
role of explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.01134, 2017.
[3] Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a"
right to explanation". arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08813, 2016.
[4] Jorge Casillas, Oscar Cordón, Francisco Herrera Triguero, and Luis Magdalena. Interpretability issues in
fuzzy modeling, volume 128. Springer, 2013.
10
