Gradient
SmoothGrad
Gradient   Input
Guided 
Back-propagation
GradCAM
Integrated Gradients
Integrated Gradients-SG
logits
conv2d_1a_3x3
mixed_7c
mixed_7b
conv2d_2a_3x3
conv2d_2b_3x3
conv2d_4a_3x3
mixed_7a
mixed_6e
mixed_6d
mixed_6c
mixed_6b
mixed_6a
mixed_5d
mixed_5c
mixed_5b
conv2d_3b_1x1
Original Explanation
Guided GradCAM
Cascading randomization 
from top to bottom layers
Original Image
Figure 2: Cascading randomization on Inception v3 (ImageNet). Figure shows the original ex-
planations (ﬁrst column) for the Junco bird as well as the label for each explanation type. Progression
from left to right indicates complete randomization of network weights (and other trainable variables)
up to that ‘block’ inclusive. We show images for 17 blocks of randomization. Coordinate (Gradient,
mixed_7b) shows the gradient explanation for the network in which the top layers starting from Logits
up to mixed_7b have been reinitialized. The last column corresponds to a network with completely
reinitialized weights. See Appendix for more examples.
Masks derived from Guided Backprop remain visually and quantitatively similar to masks of a trained
model until lower layer weights (those closest to the input) are randomized.5
The danger of the visual assessment. On visual inspection, we ﬁnd that gradient⊙input and
integrated gradients show visual similarity to the original mask. In fact, from Figure 2, it is still
possible to make out the structure of the bird even after multiple blocks of randomization. This visual
similarity is reﬂected in the SSIM comparison (Figure 5), and the rank correlation with absolute value
(Figure 4-Top). However, re-initialization disrupts the sign of the map, so that the spearman rank
correlation without absolute values goes to zero (Figure 4-Bottom) almost as soon as the top layers
are randomized. The observed visual perception versus ranking dichotomy indicates that naive visual
inspection of the masks, in this setting, does not distinguish networks of similar structure but widely
differing parameters. We explain the source of this phenomenon in our discussion section.
3.2
Independent Randomization
Overview. As a different form of the model parameter randomization test, we now conduct an inde-
pendent layer-by-layer randomization with the goal of isolating the dependence of the explanations
by layer. This approach allows us to exhaustively assess the dependence of saliency masks on lower
versus higher layer weights. More concretely, for each layer, we ﬁx the weights of other layers to
their original values, and randomize one layer at a time.
Results. Figure 3 shows the evolution of different masks as each layer of Inception v3 is independently
randomized. We observe a correspondence between the results from the cascading and independent
layer randomization experiments: Guided Backprop (along with Guided GradCAM) show invariance
to higher layer weights. However, once the lower layer convolutional weights are randomized, the
Guided Backprop masks changes, although the resulting mask is still dominated by the input structure.
5A previous version of this work noted that Guided Backprop was entirely invariant; however, this is not this
case.
5
